Title: An Extension of the Systematic Literature Review Process with Visual Text Mining: A Case Study on Software Engineering

Keywords: Systematic Literature Review (SLR), Visual Text Mining (VTM), Evidence-based Software Engineering (EBSE).

Abstract: 
Background: The systematic literature review (SLR) is a methodology used to find and aggregate all relevant existing evidence about a specific research question of interest. One of the activities associated with the SLR process is the selection of primary studies. Prior research has shown that the quality of primary study selection impacts the overall quality of the SLR. Therefore, in order to ensure better quality outcomes of the SLR as a whole, it is important to conduct as completely and as reliably as possible the primary study selection activity. This is particularly relevant when the researcher faces large volumes of primary studies, where it can be challenging to select relevant articles for further analysis – the process used to select primary studies can be arduous, time consuming, and must often be conducted manually. 

Objective: This paper addresses these challenges validating an extension to the SLR process. Such extension uses Visual Text Mining (VTM) to automate and support the selection of primary studies and the review of decisions on whether to include or
exclude studies from an SLR. 

Method: We have conducted a case study on a previously reported SLR to demonstrate the usefulness of the VTM techniques in the selection context. 

Results: The results show that the employed VTM techniques can successfully assist the SLR process. In particular, the visualizations are able to highlight inconsistencies in the treatment (inclusion or exclusion) of similar primary studies that might signal the need for closer attention when selecting studies. 

Conclusions: The use of VTM to support the study selection activity within the software engineering context requires minimal additional knowledge of visualization techniques and offers automated tool support to facilitate the execution of this activity. Different VTM techniques may be combined to support reviewers in their decisions
regarding the inclusion or exclusion of primary studies from an SLR. This should result in a more reliable treatment of primary studies and, therefore, more reliable SLR outcomes.
