A Method to support search string building in Systematic 

Literature Reviews through Visual Text Mining

Germano Duarte Mergel 

PUCRS – Pontifícia Universidade 

Católica do Rio Grande do Sul 
Av. Ipiranga, 6681, Prédio 32 

Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil 
gmergel@gmail.com 

Milene Selbach Silveira 

PUCRS – Pontifícia Universidade 

Católica do Rio Grande do Sul 
Av. Ipiranga, 6681, Prédio 32 

Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil 

milene.silveira@pucrs.br 

Tiago Silva da Silva 

UNIFESP – Universidade Federal de 

São Paulo 

Av. Cesare Mansueto G. Lattes, 1201 

São José dos Campos, SP, Brazil 

silvadasilva@unifesp.br 

 

 

ABSTRACT 
Despite the increasing popularity of systematic literature reviews 
in Software Engineering, several researchers still indicate it as a 
costly and challenging process. Aiming at alleviating this costly 
process, we propose an iterative method to support the process 
of  building  the  search  string  for  a  systematic  review.  This 
method  uses  Visual  Text  Mining  techniques  to  support  the 
researcher by suggesting new terms for the string. In order to do 
so, the method extracts relevant terms from studies selected by 
the  researcher  and  displays  them  in  a  way  that  facilitate  their 
visualization  and  supports  building  and  refining  the  search 
string.  In  order  to  check  the  feasibility  of  this  approach,  we 
developed  a  tool  that  implements  the  proposed  method. 
Interviews  with  researchers  identified  their  difficulties  in 
performing systematic reviews and captured their feedback with 
regards  the  use  of  the  proposed  method  in  a  user  study.  The 
researchers  indicated  that  this  approach  could  be  used  to 
improve the process of building the search strings for systematic 
reviews.  The  study  indicates  that  our  approach  can  be  used  to 
facilitate  the  construction  of  the  systematic  literature  review 
search string. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors 
D.2. [Software Engineering] 
Keywords 
Systematic  literature  review,  Visual  Text  Mining,  Information 
Visualization. 
1. 
The  volume  of  empirical  research  in  software  engineering  is 
constantly  expanding  and  reviews  have  become  essential  tools 
for any researcher wanting to keep him updated [4]. However, it 
is  necessary  to  adopt  a  systematic  approach  to  assess  and 
aggregate  the  results  of  the  review  in  order  to  provide  an 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  ACM  must  be  honored. 
Abstracting  with  credit  is permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or  republish, to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.  
SAC’15, April 13 - 17 2015, Salamanca, Spain  
Copyright 2015 ACM 978-1-4503-3196-8/15/04…$15.00  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2695664.2695902 

INTRODUCTION 

1594

objective  and  balanced  synthesis  of  the  research  evidence  [9]. 
As a solution, the  systematic literature review (SLR) evaluates 
and interprets available research relevant to a particular research 
question,  topic  area,  or  phenomenon  of  interest.  SLR  plays  an 
important role, synthesizing existing research using an unbiased 
approach [9], using a predefined search strategy and identifying 
relevant researches. Moreover, the strategy adopted in a review 
must be clear enough to allow its repetition by other researchers. 
Nevertheless,  SLRs  require  considerably  more  effort  from 
researchers  than  traditional  reviews  [10].  According  to  studies 
on  the  subject  [2]  [4]  [16],  amongst  the  major  difficulties  of 
conducting this type of review are building the search string and 
selecting  resulting  studies.  Moreover, 
these  are  common 
problems  in  performing  systematic  reviews  faced  by  both 
beginners and experienced researchers, and a poorly built search 
string can result in returning too many non-relevant studies, or 
even excluding relevant ones [16]. 
In  order  to  assist  the  researcher  in  the  SLR  conduction,  this 
paper presents a method that supports the process of building the 
search  string.  By  applying  Visual  Text  Mining  techniques,  it 
extracts  and  recommends  relevant  terms  based  on  the  studies 
returned  from  using  the  current  search  string.  The  researcher 
then  can  refine  the  query  and  re-apply  it  iteratively  until  the 
search string can be considered complete. 
Researchers  participated  on  a  preliminary  study  that  involved 
using  a  tool  that  implements  the  proposed  method,  providing 
material  to  analyze  its  applicability.  At  the  end  of  the  study, 
participants  indicated  that  this  method  could  help  researchers 
conducting SLRs by recommending relevant terms. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows:  Section 2 
provides  background  information  on  systematic  review  and 
Visual  Text  Mining;  Section  3  presents  the  method  proposal; 
Section  4  details  the  analysis  performed  on  the  proposed 
method;  Section  5  discusses  the  results  of  the  performed 
analysis;  Section  6  draws  conclusions  and  future  directions  to 
this research. 
2. 
This section presents the necessary basis  for  understanding the 
techniques applied in the proposed approach as well as research 
related to this topic. 
2.1 
Defined as a form of identification, evaluation and interpretation 
of  relevant  papers  to  a  research  question  [9],  the  systematic 
literature review provides mechanisms to identify and aggregate 
research  evidence  in  Software  Engineering.  It  is  a  review  that 

Systematic Literature Review 

BACKGROUND 

supports a full and fair assessment of the evidence of a topic of 
interest. 
The  SLR  can  be  seen  as  a  specific  research  methodology, 
following a strict set of methodological steps in sequence and in 
accordance to a predefined protocol [2]. Such protocol contains 
central  review  question,  the  focus  of  the  research,  knowledge 
bases and filtering criteria used in the selection of papers, among 
other definitions. 

Biolchini  et  al  [2]  define  the  process  of  systematic  literature 
review  comprehending  three  phases:  planning,  implementation 
and  analysis  of  results  (Figure  1).  The  planning  phase 
encompasses  listing  the  research  objectives  and  defining  a 
review  protocol.  Such  protocol  specifies  the  central  research 
question  and  the  methods  that  will  be  used  to  execute  the 
review.  During  the  implementation  of  the  review,  primary 
studies  are  identified,  selected  and  evaluated  according  to  pre-
defined  inclusion  and  exclusion  criteria.  Once  the  primary 
studies  are  selected,  all  information  obtained  is  analyzed  and 
synthetized, as part of the last phase. In the process, the authors 
propose  iterations  between  the  phases  of  a  systematic  review, 
verifying and addressing potential problems. "Before performing 
a systematic review, it is necessary to ensure that the protocol is 
feasible" [2]. 

 

Figure 1. SLR process as defined by Biolchini et al [2] 

Visual Text Mining 

2.2 
The Visual Text Mining (VTM) field is an intersection between 
the  fields  of  Text  Mining  and  Information  Visualization  [15]. 
Applications  in  Visual  Text  Mining  go  beyond  visualizing  the 
outcome of mining documents, using techniques of Information 
Visualization  in  the  process  of  Text  Mining  to  obtain  a  visual 
representation and support data exploration. VTM combines text 
mining  techniques  and  interactive  visualizations,  supporting 
term  extraction  and  recommendation  from  a  collection  of 
primary studies. 
For a better understanding of the concept of Visual Text Mining, 
it  is  necessary  to  understand  the  fields  of  Text  Mining  and 
Information Visualization, discussed in this section. 
2.2.1  Text Mining 
Text  Mining  is  the  process  of  discovering  new  and  unknown 
information,  using  algorithms  to  automatically  extract  it  from 
one or different text documents [8]. Sometimes it is applied to 
collections  of  texts,  supporting  the  discovery  of  patterns  and 
relationships between text documents [7]. 
One of the Text Mining techniques is to extract relevant terms 
from  a  text  document.    A  common  way  to  do  that  is  to  apply 
algorithms that run frequency-based calculations and give each 
term in a document a value or relevance [13]. To consider term 
relevance  in  a  document  that  belongs  to  a  collection,  one  can 
apply  techniques  that  involve  the  term’s  frequency  in  all 
documents. 
Tf-idf (term frequency - inverse  document frequency)  [13] is a 
statistical calculation that considers the occurrence of a term in a 
document  and  the  number  of  documents  in  a  collection  where 
the term is present. For that, tf-idf value is calculated using the 

1595

is 

considered 

an 

following formula: (cid:1872)(cid:1858)(cid:1861)(cid:1856)(cid:1858)(cid:4666)(cid:1872)(cid:481)(cid:1856)(cid:4667)(cid:3404)(cid:1872)(cid:1858)(cid:4666)(cid:1872)(cid:481)(cid:1856)(cid:4667)(cid:1499)(cid:1861)(cid:1856)(cid:1858)(cid:4666)(cid:1872)(cid:4667), where d is a 

document containing term t, tf(t,d) is how many times t appears 
in d, and idf(t) is how many documents in the collection contain 
the term t. 
A  normalization  of  the  frequency  values  of  the  terms  in  a 
document  is  recommended,  since  terms  in  big  text  documents 
might  have  a  greater  frequency  value  than  in  smaller  text 
documents,  leading  to  a  higher  tf-idf  value  without  necessarily 
indicating a greater relevance [13]. To apply normalization, the 
tf portion of tf-idf calculation is divided by the frequency of the 
most frequent term in that document (tfmax). In other words, a 
big text document may repeat a term more times than the smaller 
one  but  using  the  number  of  times  the  most-frequent  term 
appears in that document normalizes this. The final formula for 
tf-idf then becomes: 

(cid:1872)(cid:1858)(cid:1861)(cid:1856)(cid:1858)(cid:4666)(cid:1872)(cid:481)(cid:1856)(cid:4667)(cid:3404)(cid:4666)(cid:1872)(cid:1858)(cid:4666)(cid:1872)(cid:481)(cid:1856)(cid:4667)(cid:512)(cid:1872)(cid:1858)(cid:1865)(cid:1853)(cid:1876)(cid:4666)(cid:1856)(cid:4667)(cid:4667)(cid:1499)(cid:1861)(cid:1856)(cid:1858)(cid:4666)(cid:1872)(cid:4667),  where  tfmax(d) 

Information Visualization 

contains the number of times the most-frequent term appears in 
document  d.  For  purposes  of  this  paper,  the  tfidf  value 
mentioned in the following sections will always be normalized. 
2.2.2 
Information  Visualization 
emerging 
multidisciplinary  field  that  comprehends  visual  representations 
of abstract data, with the goals of facilitating the communication 
of and assisting in exploration and analysis of information [17]. 
The benefits of applications from Information Visualization are 
within  the  exploration  of  human  vision.  One  of  the  strongest 
points  in  visualization  is  the  human  ability  to  process  visual 
information  much  faster  than,  for  example,  verbally.  It  is 
possible  to  condense  a  larger  amount  of  data  in  a  single  view 
and  the  visualization  process  involves  the  human  sense  with 
greater capacity to capture information per unit of time [6].  
A  good  application  of  Information  Visualization  should  be 
unusual,  informative,  efficient  and  attractive.  Aiming  to  create 
visualization  with  such  features,  some  technique  must  be 
applied.  One  of  the  most  popular  techniques  when  visualizing 
differences is the heatmap [18]. 
Using  heatmap  for  visualizing  differences  facilitates  the  action 
of  comparing  items,  where  the  shades  of  colors  represent  the 
distance  between  values.  Without  having  to  look  at  accurate 
values,  the  heatmap  is  helpful  to  efficiently  compare  and  spot 
differences [18]. 
2.3 
In a recent systematic  mapping carried out in order to identify 
and classify tools that seek to support all or part of the process of 
SLRs  conduction  [14],  it  is  possible  to  observe  the  lack  of 
research  that  addresses  activities  on  the  planning  stage  of  the 
review, as well as the search string construction.  
The systematic  mapping found 14 studies presenting tools that 
support  SLRs  [14].  Regarding  the  phases  of  the  systematic 
literature review process that are addressed by the tools found in 
the  mapping,  from  all  studies  found  (14),  11  studies  discuss 
tools that address activities in the conduction phase of the SLR, 
and 3 studies present tools that address the process of systematic 
literature review as a whole.  
Among  the  studies  mapped  by  Marshal  et  al  [14],  the  study 
selection activity is the most commonly supported. There are 5 
studies  that  support  this  activity,  3  of  which  use  VTM 
techniques. Noteworthy that in this recent mapping there are no 
studies  on  supporting  the  search  string  construction  during  the 

Related Work 

to  deepen 

Interviews 

the  understanding  about 

Understanding the difficulties 

THE PROPOSED METHOD  

development  of  the  review  protocol.  Therefore,  this  gap  is  an 
opportunity for the development of a  study as the presented in 
this paper, exploring techniques of Visual Text Mining targeting 
the process of building the systematic review search string. 
3. 
In  this  section,  we  present  the  results  from  a  set  of  interviews 
with researchers and the proposed method. 
3.1 
Recent  studies  mention  difficulties  that  researchers  face  when 
performing  a  systematic  literature  review  [1]  [3]  [5]  [16].  In 
order 
the  mentioned 
difficulties we applied a semi-structured interview with a small 
group of researchers.  We choose to go deep instead of broad, as 
presented by Lazar, Feng and Hochheiser [12], in order to gather 
freely and detailed responses that help our reflection about the 
problem.  The  interviews  were  scheduled  and  conducted  in 
person or remotely via communication tools such as Skype1 and 
Google Hangout2. 
3.2 
In  the  following  subsections,  we  present  the  profile  of  the 
participants that answered the interview and the analysis of the 
results. 
3.2.1  Participants profile 
We  interviewed  seven  researchers,  herein  identified  as  P1, P2, 
P3,  P4,  P5,  P6  and  P7.  All  participants  have  completed  a 
systematic  literature  review  at  least  once.  Concerning  the 
experience  of  the  interviewed  researchers,  two  had  performed 
more than one systematic literature review (P6 and P7) while the 
vast  majority  applied 
technique  only  once.  Three 
respondents  (P1, P6  and P7)  stated  that  they  had  undertaken  a 
SLR without being able to finish it for different reasons, which 
were  explored  in  detail  in  the  continuation  of  the  interview. 
Regarding 
the  evaluation  and  publication  of  SLR,  four 
respondents (P3, P5, P6 and P7) reported having the results of 
their SLRs and two (P6 and P7) had their SLRs published. 
3.2.2 
We  conducted  standardized  open-ended  interviews  with  a  pre-
defined  set  of  questions  that  facilitated  collecting  data  in  a 
qualitative fashion. Table 1 presents the applied questions. 

Interview approach 

the 

Table 1. Interview Questions 

Question 

How many times? 

have not finished? 

ID 
Q1.1  Have you ever performed a systematic review? 
Q1.2  Have you ever started a systematic review but 
Q1.3  Have you ever had a systematic review evaluated 
Q1.4  Have you ever published a systematic review? 
Q1.5  How did you learn to perform a systematic 
Q1.6  What is the greatest difficulty in conducting a 

systematic review? At what stage of the process? 

in some way? 

review? 

                                                                 
1 http://www.skype.com/ 
2 https://www.google.com/hangouts/ 

1596

3.2.3  Result analysis 
Analyzing the interview answers, five of the seven participants 
referenced issues during the construction of the search string, as 
indicated  by  some  studies  on  the  subject  [1]  [4].  Specifically 
asking about systematic review that they could not complete, a 
respondent (P7) said it was due to a poorly built  search string, 
resulting in too many studies. 
Considering  the  difficulties  to  conduct  a  SLR,  one  of  the 
respondents  (P1)  states  that  his  greatest  difficulty  is  the 
definition  of  the  keywords  for  the  review  search  string, 
highlighting  the  importance of  this  step:  "[…]  If  you  choose  a 
non-representative  group  of  words,  you  won’t  get  relevant 
results. So, the toughest part to me is finding the right words for 
what I’m searching for [...]". He further states that he once had 
to define the search string "[...] by trial and error, going directly 
to the digital library, applying the search string and observing 
the results". According to him, because of that he had to revisit 
the  planning  phase  of  his  SLR  in  order  to  update  the  review 
protocol with a new search string. 
A similar experience was reported by another respondent (P6), 
mentioning that he lost time due to poorly defined search string: 
"[...] I lost three weeks of work once because of a wrong term in 
the query. [...] I defined the query, returned items and saw that 
very  few  studies  were  related  to  the  review  […]".  Other  two 
respondents cited challenges when defining the search string due 
to not knowing the proper terminology or it not being standard. 
The use of non-standardized terms is actually identified as one 
of the problems that lead to difficulties in performing systematic 
literature reviews [1]. 
Looking at the most mentioned difficulties, building the  search 
string is clearly a top challenge for the interviewed researchers, 
as shown in the Figure 2. 

 

Figure 2. Difficulties most mentioned by interviewees 

Based on the difficulties pointed out by the literature [1] [3] [5] 
[16] and the results of the interviews, we identified a need for a 
method that supports the construction of the search string in the 
systematic  review  process.  Thus,  we  propose  a  method  to 
address this need by using Visual Text Mining, which is detailed 
in the next section. 
3.3 
string building 
The method proposed in this research works iteratively between 
the  planning  and  execution  phases  of  a  systematic  literature 
review, applying Visual Text Mining techniques to support the 
researcher  in  building  and  validating  the  search  string  by 
extracting and recommending relevant terms. 

A Method to support SLRs’ search 

3.3.1  Term Recommendation 
Using  the  predefined  inclusion  and  exclusion  criteria,  the 
researcher can select a study as  relevant or non-relevant to the 
current  review.  This  action  triggers  the  term  recommendation 
activity, which uses tf-idf weighting to find key terms from the 
marked documents. To support that, a text document is extracted 
from each study in a format that allows text-mining techniques 
to read from it. This weighting technique then calculates a global 
tf-idf  value  for  each  term  on  the  collection  of  all  extracted 
documents.  
There  are  three  steps  involved  in  the  process  of  calculating  a 
term’s tf-idf weight: (1) getting a frequency value for that term 
in  studies  marked  as  relevant  (from  R  group),  (2)  getting  the 
frequency value for that term in studies marked as non-relevant 
(NR group) and (3) calculating the final tf-idf by subtracting the 
non-relevant frequency value from the relevant frequency value, 
and  then  dividing  the  resulting  value  by  the  number  of 
documents  marked  as  relevant  (|R|  or  the  cardinality  of  R 
group). 
Studies selected as relevant are grouped in a way that facilitates 
calculating  intermediary  frequency  values,  identified  as  the  R 
group. A frequency value for each term t in R group documents 
is calculated by summing all its tf-idf values, using: 

and  t  is  the  term  for  which  tf-idf  weight  is  calculated.  Studies 
marked as non-relevant by the researcher are grouped separately, 
in a group identified as  NR. Term  frequency is then calculated 
the same way, by summing all tf-idf values for a given term t: 

(cid:963)
(cid:1872)(cid:1858)(cid:3398)(cid:1861)(cid:1856)(cid:1858)(cid:4666)(cid:1872)(cid:481)(cid:1856)(cid:1861)
(cid:963)
(cid:1872)(cid:1858)(cid:3398)(cid:1861)(cid:1856)(cid:1858)(cid:4666)(cid:1872)(cid:481)(cid:3)(cid:1856)(cid:1862)(cid:4667)
(cid:1856)(cid:1862)(cid:3)(cid:1488)(cid:3)(cid:1840)(cid:1844)
(cid:1872)(cid:1858)(cid:3398)(cid:1861)(cid:1856)(cid:1858)(cid:4666)(cid:1872)(cid:481)(cid:1830)(cid:4667)(cid:3404)(cid:4666)(cid:4666)(cid:3533)(cid:1872)(cid:1858)(cid:3398)(cid:1861)(cid:1856)(cid:1858)(cid:4666)(cid:1872)(cid:481)(cid:1856)(cid:1861)

(cid:4667), where di is a document contained by  R 
(cid:481)(cid:3)where  dj  is  a  document  contained  by 
(cid:3)(cid:3415)(cid:513)(cid:1844)(cid:513) 
(cid:4667)(cid:4667)(cid:3)(cid:3398)(cid:3)(cid:4666) (cid:3533) (cid:1872)(cid:1858)(cid:3398)(cid:1861)(cid:1856)(cid:1858)(cid:4666)(cid:1872)(cid:481)(cid:3)(cid:1856)(cid:1862)(cid:3439)
(cid:4667)(cid:4667)(cid:3)

NR and t is the term  for  which tf-idf weight is calculated. The 
final  tf-idf  value  for  a  given  term  t  in  the  body  of  documents 
resulting from the literature search D can then be found by the 
following formula: 

(cid:1856)(cid:1861)(cid:3)(cid:1488)(cid:3)(cid:1844)

(cid:3031)(cid:3037)(cid:3)(cid:1488)(cid:3)(cid:3015)(cid:3019)

(cid:3031)(cid:3036)(cid:3)(cid:1488)(cid:3)(cid:3019)

the 

the 

terms 

terms  at 

top.  Those  are 

Implementing the proposal: SLR.qub 

where |R| is the number of documents marked as relevant (or the 
cardinality of R group). The outcome of that is a list of global tf-
idf  values  for  every  term  identified  in  the  studies.  Sorting  that 
list by the highest relevance values results in exposing the key 
relevant 
to  be 
recommended  by  the  method.  Including  them  in  the  search 
string  implies  in  returning  to  the  planning  phase,  updating  the 
review protocol and searching again, refining the search strategy 
of the SLR. 
3.4 
tool 
In  order  to  allow  a  discussion  about  the  proposed  method,  we 
developed  a  tool  that  implements  it.  The  SLR.qub  tool 
(Systematic  Literature  Review  –  query  builder)  applies  Text 
Mining  algorithms  to  the  collection  of  abstracts  from  the 
primary  studies  returned  from  searching  in  IEEExplore  digital 
library  with  the  current  SLR  search  string.  It  is  worthwhile  to 
mention that this tool was built as a proof of concept, and not a 
commercial  use  –  its  limitations  are  discussed  in  the  final 
considerations. 
Once done mining and extracting useful information, it displays 
a screen on top of the results page with a visual representation of 

 

Figure 3. Proposed method workflow 

As  indicated  in  Figure  3,  this  method  is  an  adaptation  from 
Biolchini  et  al.  [2]  proposed  approach  for  applying  systematic 
literature reviews. Once the planning phase is complete and the 
protocol is created – including the defined search strategy – then 
an expert on the subject is responsible for the approval (1). Once 
approved,  the  protocol  is  put  into  practice  and  the  searching 
commences.  During  the  selection  of  primary  studies  (2),  we 
recommend applying the method proposed on this paper. 
Using the method, a tool implementing it would act as a search 
string  verifier  (3).  Giving  the  researcher  the  ability  to  mark 
resulting studies as relevant or non-relevant to the current review 
(4),  Text  Mining  techniques  extract  terms  and  expose  the  key 
ones in a visualization that indicates the relevance of those terms 
and  supports  the  researcher  on  the  decision  of  updating  the 
search  string.  Once  the  researcher  is  done  marking  documents 
and  updating  the  search  string  to  incorporate  new  terms  or 
remove  former  ones  (5),  the  proposed  method  takes  the 
researcher back to planning phase, updating the review protocol 
to reflect the new  search string (6). The protocol then is taken 
into review for approval before entering execution phase again, 
repeating  the  process  that  iteratively  refines  the  systematic 
review search string based on the studies being returned. If no 
changes were made, the researcher might proceed applying the 
systematic  literature  review  by  moving  to  the  next  step  (7), 
continuing on Biolchini et al. [2] process. 
Term recommendation is one of the key features of the method 
proposed on this paper. The following subsection clarifies on the 
approach  and 
the  objective  of 
identifying the most relevant terms for recommendation. 

techniques  applied  with 

1597

to 

all  returned  studies  in  a  carousel.  A  screen  captured  from  the 
tool is in Figure 4. 
Besides  the  retrieved  studies,  the  SLR.qub  tool  displays  the 
search  string  applied  with  its  terms  highlighted  in  blue  and 
logical operators in gray. In line with the search string, a button 
labeled “Search!” applies a new search in IEEExplore using the 
updated search string. 
The  tool  allows  the  researcher  to  update  terms  or  logical 
operators  on  the  search  string,  manually  adding  or  removing 
terms. Just below the search string, there is an area reserved for 
listing  recommended  terms.  In  order  to  display  recommend 
terms based on the researcher’s indication of relevant and non-
relevant  studies,  this  area  is  dynamically  populated  and  varies 
according  to  the  user  interaction.  When  clicked,  the  terms 
recommended  are  added 
the  current  search  string, 
concatenated with a logical operator OR. It would be up to the 
user  then  to  edit  the  search  string  and  tailor  the  term  newly 
added to the search string. 
As shown in Figure 4-a, each term suggested by the tool carries 
a  global  value  of  tf-idf,  calculated  by  the  applied  mining 
techniques.  This  value  indicates  the  relevance  of  a  term  in 
relation  to  the  collection  of  marked  documents,  and  facilitates 
comparison between terms (to verify, for instance, the distance 
between two terms).  Still in Figure 4-a, the first recommended 
term (graphs) has a relevance value (tf-idf) of 8.05. 
To  select  a  study  as  relevant,  the  researcher  must  click  on  the 
representation  of  the  study  in  the  carousel  area.  On  the  first 
click, the color on the bottom of the document becomes green, 
indicating that the study is relevant for the systematic literature 
review  in  progress.  As  an  effect  of  this  interaction,  the 
recommended  terms  are  updated  to  reflect  the  changed  list  of 
key terms, after the re-calculating tf-idf values.  
To  indicate  a  document  as  non-relevant  to  the  SLR,  the 
researcher must click again on a study that had been selected as 

relevant in the carousel. Right after the click, the color changes 
from  green  to  red,  indicating  it  as  non-relevant.  Figure  4-b 
illustrates  the  flow  of  selecting  studies.  Initially,  the  study  is 
unselected. Selecting and unselecting studies is a cyclical action 
and  state  changing  is  triggered  by  clicking  on  the  study  in  the 
carousel.  In  the  unselected  state,  a  study  is  neutral  to  the 
algorithm, not interfering in the recommended terms. 

terms  and  all 

At the bottom, SLR.qub displays a heatmap visualization of the 
recommended 
the  returned  studies.  This 
visualization has a number of functions in the SLR.qub tool. The 
first  one  is  to  show  which  studies  are  visible  in  the  carousel, 
positioning  the  researcher  on  the  list  of  studies.  The  second 
function of the heatmap visualization is to identify if a study is 
selected as relevant, non-relevant or if it is unselected, using the 
colors  green  and  red  or  leaving  it  uncolored,  respectively. 
Finally, it helps  to determine what could be(cid:850) a potential set of 
control papers to validate candidate search strings in a topic of 
expertise to the researchers, considering a given set of terms and 
papers. 
As its main feature, the heatmap in SLR.qub is also responsible 
for  representing  the  relevance  of  the  recommended  terms  in 
relation to the studies. In order to build this visualization, shades 
of colors from yellow to red are applied based on the relevance 
(tf-idf(t,d))  values  of  a  given  term  (t)  in  a  particular  study 
extracted abstract (referred to as document d). In the format of a 
table,  the  heatmap  represents  the  recommended  terms  in  rows 
and  studies  in  columns.  As  noted  in  Figure  4-c,  reddish  cells 
indicate a higher relevance value. For instance, in Figure 4-c, the 
term graphs has a greater relevance in study 2, whereas the term 
beginners  finds  more  relevance  in  study  1.  Visualizing  the 
relevancies this way supports the researcher in both looking for 
studies  based  on  a  term  known  to  be  relevant  to  the  SLR  or 
selecting terms based on studies. 

Figure 4. SLR.qub screenshot 

1598

There  are  also  documents  like  D5  and  D6,  which  were  never 
selected  as  non-relevant.  On  the  other  hand,  documents  D19, 
D20,  D22  and  D24  were  not  selected  relevant  by  any  of  the 
participants.  Document  D5  is  a  key  reference  on  systematic 
literature reviews in SE [9] [10] [11]. Reading the transcript of 
the execution of the study, three of the four participants selected 
the study after noticing that. 
Regarding documents D19, D20, D22 and D24, one of them is 
related  to  the  area  of  Software  Testing  (D19),  two  of  them 
discuss certifications in project management (D20 and D22) and 
the latter is a meta-analysis on the relationship between software 
developers’  productivity  and  personality  (D24).  At  the  end  of 
each  execution,  we  captured  the  search  string  built  by  each 
participant.  
Table  2  shows  the  incidence  of  terms  included  by  the 
participants  during  the  study,  in  addition  to  the  original  terms 
from the proposed SLR. There are terms like SLR (included by 
three  of  the  seven  participants)  and  method,  replication,  study 
and  tertiary  (each  included  by  two  of  the  seven  participants). 
Note: the same participant (P3) applied the term search twice on 
his search string (S3). 
Table 2. Frequency of terms present in final search strings 

Study description 

ANALYSIS OF THE PROPOSED 

4. 
METHOD 
In order to discuss the applicability of the proposed method, we 
conducted a preliminary study using the tool that implements it 
(SLR.qub). This section discusses this study and its results. 
4.1 
The preliminary study consisted of executing the construction of 
the search string for a proposed systematic literature review. At 
the  beginning  of  the  study,  participants  were  briefed  with 
information  regarding  a  proposed  SLR,  comprehending  the 
inclusion and exclusion criteria and a basic search string to start 
with.  Its’  objective  was  to  understand  the  current  state  of 
systematic literature reviews in the area of Software Engineering 
and  finding  the  challenges  faced  by  researches  that  applied  it. 
The basic search question provided for that SLR was “systematic 
review  in  Software  Engineering”.  We  conducted  the  study 
individually  with  each  participant,  in  a  mixed  present  and 
remote fashion but always observing the participant’s actions. 
Given the brief description on the proposed SLR, the next step 
consisted on pulling up IEEExplore digital library, applying the 
basic  search  string  and  activating  the  SLR.qub  tool.  Using  the 
tool,  the  participants  had  to  mark  the  returned  studies  they 
considered relevant or non-relevant for the hypothetical SLR.  
4.2 
We chose to perform the study with the same seven participants 
from  the  interviews  discussed  in  section  3.2,  given  our 
familiarity  to  their  level  of  experience  with  SLRs.  Participants 
had to be familiar with Software Engineering researches and had 
already completed at least one systematic literature review. That 
last prerequisite regarding the researcher's experience with SLRs 
was crucial to the understanding and realization of the proposed 
task. 
4.3 
Figure 5 represents the documents found during the preliminary 
study  (from  D1  to  D25)  and  the  respective  tagging  by  the 
researchers.  Looking  at  it,  we  can  see  how  many  times  each 
document  has  been  tagged  as  relevant,  non-relevant  or  left 
unselected. 

Participants profile 

Results Analysis 

 

Figure 5: the 25 documents found and their tagging 

In Table 2, document D1 shows as selected by all participants in 
the  study  as  relevant.  D1  is  the  first  study  resulting  in 
IEEExplore  search,  and  it  provides  a  discussion  on  the 
challenges  faced  by  researchers  that  conducted  systematic 
literature  reviews.  That  paper  is  highly  relevant  to  the  SLR 
proposed in the study and was correctly selected as relevant by 
all participants. 

 

Post-study Interviews 

4.4 
For capturing participants’ opinion on the conducted preliminary 
study and the proposed method, we conducted interviews right 
after each execution. This section presents the results. 
Seven researchers indicated they have not found a search string 
they  considered  relevant  to  the  proposed  systematic  review. 
Three of the five researchers (P5, P6 and P7) indicated the lack 
of  relevant  terms  in  the  recommendations.  The  other  two 
researchers  (P1  and  P2)  indicated  lack  of  time3  to  work  on 
                                                                 
3 Lack of time, as indicated by the participants might be related 
to  the  limited  time  each  participant  had  on  this  preliminary 
study. 

1599

selecting  and  marking  the  studies,  analyzing  the  recommended 
terms and editing the search string. 
When  asked  about  the  way  researchers  often  build  the  search 
string  of  a  SLR,  four  researchers  indicated  that  they  start  by 
using terms they are familiar with (P2, P4, P5 and P6). Through 
a simple search with these terms, they  capture synonymous by 
reading  some  of  the  returned  studies.  One  of  the  interviewees 
(P6) describes the process as follows: "I first include the terms I 
know. Use them to search, revise and update the search string 
based on the returning papers. Then I repeat the process until I 
find an interesting search string [...]". 
The other three researchers (P1, P3 and P7) reported using the 
most  popular  and  referenced  studies  (cited  by  more  papers). 
"[...] Then try extracting terms. Would be somewhat similar to 
your tool but using a predefined set of studies”, noted one of the 
researchers (P3).  
The researchers were unanimous in their responses when asked 
if the method would help a researcher conducting a systematic 
literature  review  in  an  unfamiliar  area,  by  recommending 
relevant  terms.  One  of  the  researchers  (P3)  answered:  "Yes  it 
would  help,  as  it  would  aid  directly  in  the  issue  of  finding 
adequate  terms.  If  you  don’t  know  a  particular  area,  it  is 
difficult to find some terms, and the method would help exactly 
with that". 
When  asked  about  researchers  using  the  proposed  method  to 
perform  SLRs  in  a  field  they  are  already  experienced  in,  most 
participants  claimed  that  the  tool  would  help  in  building  the 
search string with some caveats. Researchers P2, P3, P5 and P7 
said it is more likely that it would be used in cases where there is 
an outline of the search string but needing verification. One of 
the researchers (P5) also indicated that he could imagine himself 
using  the  tool  to  update  his  familiarity  with  the  latest 
terminology used in the area. 
5. 
DISCUSSION 
From  the  participants  of  this  study,  the  most  experienced 
researchers  (P6  and  P7)  –  who had  carried  out  more  than  one 
systematic  review  and  had  some  reviews  evaluated  and 
published – mentioned difficulties in building the search string. 
This finding is in agreement with authors claiming that problems 
with  the  construction  of  the  search  string  and  selection  of 
primary  studies  are  within  the  most  frequent  in  performing 
systematic  reviews,  faced  by  both  beginners  and  experienced 
researchers  [16].  The  experience  gained  by  performing  SLRs 
also made the task of tagging studies easier by them, using their 
known  references  on  the  systematic  review  area.  One  of  the 
most  experienced  researchers  (P6)  states  that  it  accelerates  the 
usage  of  the  method  and  facilitates  its  integration  in  the  SLR 
process. 
As  mentioned  by  researchers  P2,  P3,  P5  and  P7  when  asked 
about the usage of such method by experienced researchers, it is 
possible to notice that P6 tried to verify terms he already knew, 
which could be considered a valid use of the proposed method. 
However,  for  the  method  to  work  that  way,  it  must  be  used 
iteratively,  running  new  searches  as  the  search  string  is 
modified. Thus, refining the resulting list of studies to the point 
of finding a set of studies familiar to the researcher and known 
to  be  relevant,  confirming  the  relevance  of  the  terms  in  the 
search string. 

1600

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE 

6. 
WORK 
As  observed  in  the  interviews,  researchers  face  difficulties  in 
building the SLR’s search string regardless of their experience 
with  it,  as  mentioned  in  the  literature  [1] [4].  Yet,  methods  or 
tools  addressing  this  specific  activity  on  the  SLR  are  still 
uncommon. 
In order to assist the construction of the search string of a SLR, 
this  paper  presented  an  iterative  method  that  supports  the 
researcher  by  suggesting  relevant  terms  based  on  manually 
selected  studies.  Through  techniques  of  Visual  Text  Mining, 
terms  are  extracted  and  presented 
through  a  heatmap 
visualization  that  facilitates  identifying  relevant  terms  on 
returned  studies.  Once  the  search  string  is  modified  to 
accommodate any new terms, the method supports the update of 
the  review  protocol  and  re-execution  of  the  search  activity, 
allowing  the  researcher  to  repeat  the  process  as  often  as 
necessary  for  the  construction  and  refinement  of  the  search 
string. 
For  the  analysis  of  the  applicability  of  this  proposal,  we 
developed  a  tool  that  implements  the  proposed  method  and 
tested  it  with  researchers  previously  interviewed,  as  part  of  a 
preliminary study. At the end of each execution, the researcher 
was  subjected  to  a  post-study  interview  that  captured  his 
opinion,  relating  to  difficulties  he  might  have  experienced  in 
performing  systematic 
literature  reviews.  All  participants 
indicated  that  the  tool  could  help  researchers  conducting  a 
systematic literature review in an area they are not familiar with. 
Most  participants  also  believe  it  would  help  researchers  who 
have some experience in the area they are conducting a SLR but 
in a slightly different fashion, by verifying a built search string 
or  updating  the  researcher  with  the  latest  terminology  in  the 
area. 
The  SLR.qub  tool  requires  some  refinement  to  address  its 
limitations,  before  submitting  it  for  use  by  a  larger  and  more 
diverse  sample  of  researchers  –  with  different  experiences  in 
performing systematic literature reviews. Therefore, we will be 
able  to  capture  more  information  and  feed  more  depth 
discussions in this promising research field. 
6.1 
One  of  the  main  limitations  of  this  research  is  technical  and 
refers to the Text Mining techniques applied. The SLR.qub tool 
reads  the  results  page  in  IEEExplore  but  accessing  and 
extracting  the  full  text  of  each  study  showed  to  be  technically 
unfeasible for this preliminary study. This is because the results 
page in IEEExplore shows only the abstract for each study (vs 
the  full  study  text).  Thus,  SLR.qub  could  only  extract  and 
analyze terms the abstract of each study. 
Due  to  that  limitation,  the  relevance  of  the  extracted  terms  is 
calculated over a body of text that, on average, has around fifty 
words. With recent studies questioning the quality of abstracts of 
studies in the area of Software  Engineering and indicating that 
the abstracts of publications contains, in general, less than half 
of  the  information  contained  in  a  study  [10],  this  limitation 
introduces a bias to the search result. Another limitation is the 
low  number  –  seven  –  of  participants  in  the  discussed  study. 
There is a need for a more extensive and rigorous evaluation. It 
is important though to notice that the SLR.qub tool is a proof-of-
concept  created  to  support  the  preliminary  study  conducted  as 
part of this research to explore the proposed method. 

Limitations 

School  of  Computer  Science  and  Mathematics,  Keele 
University, EBSE Technical Report, EBSE-2007-01, 2007. 
[11] B.  Kitchenham,  P.  Brereton,  and  D.  Budgen.  Mapping 

study completeness and reliability - a case study. 2012.  

[12] J. Lazar, J. H. Feng, and H. Hochheiser. Research methods 
in human-computer interaction. John Wiley & Sons, 2010. 
[13] C. D. Manning, P. Raghavan, and H. Schütze. Introduction 
to  information  retrieval,  volume  1.  Cambridge  university 
press Cambridge, 2008. 

[14] C.  Marshall  and  P.  Brereton.  Tools  to  support  systematic 
literature  reviews  in  software  engineering:  A  mapping 
and 
study. 
Measurement,  2013  ACM/IEEE  International  Symposium 
on, pages 296–299. IEEE, 2013. 

Software  Engineering 

In  Empirical 

[15] M. C. F. De Oliveira and H. Levkowitz. From visual data 
exploration to visual data mining:  A survey.  Visualization 
and Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions on, 9(3):378–
394, 2003. 

[16] M.  Riaz,  M.  Sulayman,  N.  Salleh,  and  E.  Mendes. 
Experiences  conducting  systematic  reviews  from  novices’ 
perspective.  In  Proc.  of  EASE,  volume  10,  pages  1–10, 
2010. 

[17] J.  Steele  and  N.  Iliinsky.  Beautiful  Visualization:  Looking 
at  Data  through  the  Eyes  of  Experts.”  O’Reilly  Media, 
Inc.”, 2010. 

[18] N.  Yau.  Visualize  this:  the  FlowingData  guide  to  design, 

visualization, and statistics. John Wiley & Sons, 2011. 

Future Work 

6.2 
A  further  research  lies  in  rewriting  the  mining  algorithm  in  a 
more  robust  way,  extracting  content  from  the  full  studies  text 
(vs.  reading  from  only  the  abstracts).  This  approach  could 
influence significantly the relevance of the recommended terms, 
and a new research would be required to verify that hypothesis. 
Another  possible  further  research  involves  enhancing  the  tool 
that  implements  the  method  by  making  it  broader,  so  it  would 
read studies not only from IEEExplore but also from other main 
digital libraries. By doing that, the mining techniques would be 
performed on top of a larger set of studies, possibly increasing 
relevance of the recommended terms. It is important, though, to 
account for study duplication (studies that can be found in more 
than  one  digital  library)  and  how  each  search  engine  in  those 
digital libraries handle logical sentences. 
7. 
Our  thanks  to  the  participants  of  the  study  and  to  FAPESP 
(Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo). 
8. 
[1]  Babar, M. A., and Zhang, H. (2009). Systematic literature 
reviews  in  software  engineering:  Preliminary  results  from 
interviews with researchers. In Proceedings of the 2009 3rd 
Software 
International 
Engineering  and  Measurement 
IEEE 
Computer Society. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

REFERENCES 

(pp.  346-355). 

Symposium 

on  Empirical 

[2]  J.  Biolchini,  P.  G.  Mian,  A.  C.  C.  Natali,  and  G.  H. 
Travassos.  Systematic  review  in  software  engineering. 
System  Engineering  and  Computer  Science  Department 
COPPE/UFRJ, Technical Report ES, 679(05):45, 2005. 

[3]  T.  Dybå,  T.  Dingsøyr,  and  G.  K.  Hanssen.  Applying 
systematic  reviews  to  diverse  study  types:  An  experience 
and 
report. 
Measurement,  2007.  ESEM  2007.  First  International 
Symposium on, pages 225–234. IEEE, 2007. 

Software  Engineering 

In  Empirical 

[4]  T.  Dybå  and  T.  Dingsøyr.  Strength  of  evidence  in 
systematic reviews in software engineering. In Proceedings 
of  the  Second  ACM-IEEE  international  symposium  on 
Empirical  software  engineering  and  measurement,  pages 
178–187. ACM, 2008. 

[5]  K.  R.  Felizardo,  S.  G.  MacDonell,  E.  Mendes,  and(cid:850) J.  C. 
Maldonado. A systematic mapping on the use of visual data 
mining  to  support  the  conduct  of  systematic  literature 
reviews. Journal of Software, 7(2):450–461, 2012. 

[6]  S. Few. Now you see it: simple visualization techniques for 

quantitative analysis. Analytics Press, 2009. 

[7]  R. Garg et al. Study of text based mining. In (cid:850) Proceedings 
of the International Conference on Advances in Computing 
and Artificial Intelligence, pages 5–8. ACM, 2011. 

the  37th  annual  meeting  of 

[8]  M. A. Hearst. Untangling text data mining. In Proceedings 
of 
for 
Computational  Linguistics  on  Computational  Linguistics, 
pages  3–10.  Association  for  Computational  Linguistics, 
1999. 

the  Association 

[9]  B.  Kitchenham.  Procedures  for  performing  systematic 

reviews. Keele, UK, Keele University, 33:2004, 2004. 

[10] B. Kitchenham and S. Charters. Guidelines for performing 
systematic  literature  reviews  in  software  engineering. 

1601

