Using Information Visualization and Text Mining

to Facilitate the Conduction of Systematic

Literature Reviews

Sandra Fabbri1(&), Elis Hernandes1, Andre Di Thommazo1,2,
Anderson Belgamo1,2,3, Augusto Zamboni1, and Cleiton Silva1,2

1LaPES-Software Engineering Research Lab, Universidade Federal de São Carlos,

São Carlos, SP, Brazil

{sfabbri, elis_hernandes, augusto_zamboni}@dc.ufscar.br

2Instituto Federal de Educação, Ciência e Tecnologia de São Paulo,

São Carlos, SP, Brazil

{andredt, anderson, cleitonrqs}@ifsp.edu.br

3Methodist University of Piracicaba, Piracicaba, SP, Brazil

Abstract. Systematic Literature Review (SLR or SR) and Systematic Map-
ping (SM) are scientiﬁc literature review techniques that follow well-deﬁned
stages, according to a protocol previously elaborated. Besides systematizing the
search for relevant studies, the SR predicts the organization and the analysis of
the obtained results. However, the SR application is laborious because there are
many steps to be followed. Aiming to offer computational support to SR and
SM, the StArt (State of the Art through Systematic Review) tool was devel-
oped. Besides helping the steps of SR or SM, the StArt tool has implemented
visualization and text mining techniques to support the conduction and the
reporting of the SR or SM. A comparative analysis was carried out in relation
to StArt and other similar tools.
Keywords: Systematic literature review  Systematic mapping  Tool
Visualization



1 Introduction

The Systematic Literature Review process (SR) has its origins in the medical area and
its objective, according to Pai et al. [1], is the creation of a complete and impartial
summary about a given research topic following well deﬁned and known procedures.
Recently, this process is being adapted to the computer science area, particularly in
Software Engineering [2]. Some advantages of the SR usage are the coverage, the
replicability and the reliability of its process. Besides systematizing the search for
relevant studies, the SR predicts the organization and the analysis of the obtained
results. However, the SR process is more laborious than the research conducted on an
informal basis [2].

J. Cordeiro et al. (Eds.): ICEIS 2012, LNBIP 141, pp. 243–256, 2013.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-40654-6_15,
Ó Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013

244

S. Fabbri et al.

A previous activity to the SR should be the Systematic Mapping (SM) which
objective, according to Petersen et al. [3], is to build a classiﬁcation scheme and to
structure a software engineering research area. Like a SR, SM is also a laborious
activity and its process is similar to the SR process, with many repetitive steps. One of
the main differences between SR and SM is that the desired results of SMs are mainly
quantitative and the selected studies cannot be read in full. Despite this fact, quan-
titative data can also aid the summarization that should be provided by a SR.

Thus, considering that there are several steps to be executed and several docu-
ments to be managed, computer support can aid the conformance to the SR and SM
processes, enabling higher quality in their execution.

Since 2006, the StArt tool [4] has been developed. In 2008 it was completely
restructured and a new version is available [5, 6]. This version provides full support to
carry out SRs and visualization and text mining are being added for easing data
summarization since, in general, the SR outcome generate a lot of data for trans-
forming into knowledge. As mentioned by Burley [7], information visualization is a
valuable tool for knowledge integration activities and, in StArt, such views allow the
researcher to ﬁnd, in a simple way, information on the most important events, the
evolution of the research topic by the academic community, and so on. This infor-
mation is very common in SM.

Another important contribution that has been reached with information visuali-
zation in StArt is the evaluation of the search strings quality. An important point in
this kind of literature reviews is to ﬁnd and ensure that the search strings bring all the
relevant studies on the research topic. The StArt tool provides visualization of all the
studies retrieved as well as their references. Hence, it is possible identifying, for
example, if a frequently cited reference was or was not retrieved by the search string.
Based on this context, the objective of this paper is to explore the contributions of
information visualization for these kinds of literature reviews. Section 2 presents an
overview of StArt functionalities and highlights some features that aid the control of
SR and SM processes. Section 3 explains the visualization support provided by StArt
and how it can be used to enhance the summarization of the investigated topic.
Section 4 presents the support of text mining processing. Section 5 presents a com-
parative analysis of related tools and Sect. 6 presents the conclusions and future work.

2 An Overview of the StArt

Before explaining how information visualization and text mining processing help on
identifying important information for SM and SRs, an overview of the main func-
tionalities of StArt is presented below. As mentioned before, the processes of SR and
SM have some repetitive steps and require discipline and systematic practice from the
researcher. The information must be registered in an organized way, such that the
expected results are reached, the process can be replicable and all the information can
be packed.

Thus, StArt has been developed for providing automated support to as many steps
as possible. Functionalities to ease data summarization were also implemented in the

Using Information Visualization and Text Mining

245

tool as the possibility to display data through visualization and Excel formatted
reports, according to researcher’s needs.

As the SM process is a subset of the SR process, StArt was initially planned to
support SRs and currently it is being adapted to also support SMs. Figure 1 illustrates
the general process of SR, highlighting what is done with (left side) and without (right
side) StArt support. As electronic scientiﬁc databases do not allow automated search
of primary studies, steps 2, 3 and 4 must be executed without the support of the tool.
They are: the adjustment of search strings in search engines, which happens while the
protocol is being deﬁned and reviewed; the execution of these search strings after the
protocol approval; and the exportation of the search result in a BibTex ﬁle, respec-
tively. The step numbers used in this ﬁgure will be used in the explanation of the StArt
functionalities.

The main functionalities of StArt are presented in the screen shot of Fig. 2. At the
left side there is the hierarchical directory tree with the SR process phases. At the right
side, the information associated to the functionality selected on the left side is
presented.

Shortly, the goals of the three phases are:

• Planning Phase, which consists of the protocol ﬁlling (Step 1 of Fig. 1);
• Execution Phase, which is composed of Studies Identiﬁcation (Steps 2, 3, 4, and 5
of Fig. 1), Selection (Steps 6, 7, and 8 of Fig. 1) and Extraction (Step 9 of Fig. 1).
In this phase the researcher should identify the studies, select them and extract the
relevant information for answering the research question.

• Summarization Phase (Steps 10 and 11 of Fig. 1), which corresponds to the analysis
of the data extracted from each accepted study and the elaboration of a ﬁnal report
describing the state of the art. For this phase, StArt provides graphics, spreadsheets
and data visualizations, aiming to make the researcher’s tasks easier. Such options
will be detailed in Sect. 4.

In the next sections, each phase is discussed in detail, exemplifying the support
provided by the StArt tool.

2.1 Planning

In this phase StArt supports the SR Protocol elaboration (Step 1 of Fig. 1) according
to the attributes suggested by [8]. Some of the attributes are: research question deﬁ-
nition (the research question that the review is intended answer); keywords that will be
used for searching for studies; search engines (examples: ACM, IEEE, Scopus); cri-
teria for acceptance or rejection of studies; etc. There is a help message for each
protocol attribute aiming to guide its ﬁlling. The protocol is stored in the tool and can
be accessed and modiﬁed if necessary. It is worth noting that, to ensure the SR process
conformance, the content of the protocol ﬁelds are reﬂected in later steps of the SR
process. For example, when a search engine is chosen during the protocol ﬁlling, it is
added under the Studies Identiﬁcation of the Execution Phase, as shown in Fig. 3.
Similarly, each attribute inserted in the Information Extraction Form Attributes during

246

S. Fabbri et al.

Fig. 1. SLR steps: Left side – actions supported by StArt and Right side – actions not
supported by StArt.

the protocol ﬁlling becomes a ﬁeld that must be ﬁlled in during the Extraction Step
(Step 9 of Fig. 1), as shown in Fig. 4.

2.2 Execution

This phase of the SR has three steps according to the guidelines proposed in [2, 8].
The ﬁrst one is Studies Identiﬁcation (Steps 2–5 of Fig. 1). In this step, the researcher
should adjust the search string using the keywords earlier deﬁned in the protocol.
After this step, the strings should be applied in each search engine, for example, IEEE,
Scopus, ACM, Springer and Web of Science. This action is not supported by the tool
and the search results must be imported into StArt. As the studies are being imported
into the tool, a score is assigned for each one, depending on the keywords deﬁned in
the protocol appear in the title, abstract and keywords list of each study. This score
can be used, for example, to establish an order of reading once studies with higher
scores should be more relevant to the SR. Also, if the studies with higher scores are
not relevant to the research question, it is possible that the strings should be revisited
and improved. The string deﬁnition is an important point to the success of SRs, and its

Using Information Visualization and Text Mining

247

Fig. 2. Overview of the StArt tool.

Fig. 3. Search engines deﬁned in the protocol are automatically inserted under Studies
Identiﬁcation.

quality can be accessed through visualization provide by StArt, which is explored and
presented in Sect. 4.

The second step is Studies Selection (Step 6 of Fig. 1). In this step, the researcher
should use the inclusion and exclusion criteria, deﬁned in the protocol, to classify the
studies as accepted or rejected. Duplicated studies are automatically identiﬁed by the
tool. When the study is accepted, the researcher can attribute to it a relevance level
(Very High, High, Low or Very Low).

The third step is Extraction (Steps 7, 8 and 9 of Fig. 2). At this step, the researcher
must read the full version of each ‘‘Accepted study’’, elaborate a summary and ﬁll in
its Information Extraction Form (Fig. 4B).

Aiming to facilitate this step, it is possible to link the full text ﬁle (e.g. PDF ﬁles)

of each study with its record in the tool.

248

S. Fabbri et al.

Fig. 4. Relationship between attributes deﬁned in the protocol and the form available during
the Extraction step.

2.3

Summarization

In this phase (Step 10 of Fig. 2), StArt provides the following facilities:
• Easy access to the information of all studies accepted in Extraction Step. Comments
and information extracted in previous steps can be accessed and copied to a text
editor added in the tool. After collecting that information, the researcher can
transfer this initial version of the summary to a more powerful text editor.

• Generation of charts that support a quantitative SR characterization. For example:
the percentage of studies identiﬁed by each search engine, the percentage of studies
accepted, rejected and duplicated in Extraction step, the times that each inclusion

Fig. 5. Options for specifying reports.

Using Information Visualization and Text Mining

249

Fig. 6. Visualization of publications on ‘‘traceability’’ over time.

and exclusion criterion was used for classifying the studies as accepted or rejected
(Fig. 11). In fact, this kind of quantitative data is particularly relevant for Sys-
tematic Mappings [3]. In case the researcher choose to do meta-analysis, carry out
statistical tests or elaborate other charts, StArt can generate, among other reports, a
spreadsheet that allows data manipulation outside the tool. These reports can be
generated according to researchers’ needs, based on options that allow grouping
data in different ways, (Fig. 5A), applying different ﬁlters (Fig. 5B) and choosing
speciﬁc characteristics of the studies (Fig. 5C). Figure 5D shows a preview of the
report.

• Deal with a large volume of data to discover features, patterns and hidden trends
through visualization. When an SR or SM process is ﬁnished, there is a large
amount of data related to the research topic that can show trends in the evolution of
the topic over time, which is interesting information to explain the state of the art.
As mentioned before, the information visualization is a helpful tool for knowledge
integration activities.

3 Visualization in StArt

Considering the importance of quantitative data for both the SR and SM and the fact
that information visualization explores the natural visual ability of humans aiming to
facilitate information processing [9], StArt uses visualization to facilitate knowledge
management about literature reviews. Using effective visual interfaces, it is possible to

250

S. Fabbri et al.

Fig. 7. Visualization of conferences/journals where ‘‘traceability’’ has been published.

quickly manipulate large volumes of data to discover characteristics, patterns and
hidden trends.

Based on visualization, for example, it is easier to realize how a speciﬁc research
topic evolved over time. See Fig. 6 where the researcher’s interest was to understand
how the topic ‘‘traceability’’ was explored by the academic community, in relation to
the question investigated in this example. It is easy to identify that in 2005 and 2006
there was only one published study; in 2007 and 2008 there were few additional
studies, but in 2009, 2010 and 2011, the number of studies that mentioned the research
topic was more signiﬁcant than in the previous years.

To build this visualization, the researcher should select the following options
(Fig. 6): green rectangle representing an accepted study; part of the study title nearby
the rectangle, the publication year as the grouping ﬁlter, and the Radial Graph as the
visualization technique.

Now, suppose that the researcher would like to identify appropriated places for
submitting a study or for publishing results of a literature review. In this case he/she
should select almost the same options mentioned before, exchanging year by place.
This visualization (Fig. 7), allows identifying the main discussion forums for the topic
under investigation. Observe that some places have few studies related to ‘‘trace-
ability’’, while some others have more publications on this topic. Besides, the visu-
alization type was Radial Graph and the studies titles were omitted.

If the researcher wishes to merge both the previous analysis in one graph, it would
be better to use a different visualization type. In this case the Tree technique seems

Using Information Visualization and Text Mining

251

Fig. 8. Visualization of conferences/journals where ‘‘traceability’’ issue has been published
according to the year.

better, as shown in the screenshot of Fig. 8. The researcher can expand the levels
according to their need.

A double click on a selected study shows information (like authors, abstracts, etc)

about it.

In addition to the features described above, visualization is also used to show the
relationship among the studies recovered in literature review. This information allows
evaluating the set of studies and enhancing the search for them. This resource is better
explained in next section.

4 Text Mining in StArt

According to [10], the growing number of publications combined with increasingly
cross-disciplinary sources makes it challenging to follow emerging research topics and
identify key studies. It is even harder to begin exploring a new ﬁeld without a starting
set of references.

During the conduction of literature reviews many studies are retrieved from var-
ious search engines through search strings. Hence, the researcher must be careful not
to leave out any studies that may be relevant. According to [11], the usual problem of
systematic reviews is that the more inclusive the search strategy, the more irrelevant

252

S. Fabbri et al.

Fig. 9. Relationship among the studies uploaded into StArt and their references.

studies will be retrieved; the more precise and speciﬁc the search strategy, the more
relevant studies will be missed.

In order to help minimizing this problem, StArt provides support to identify the
references of each study retrieved by the search strings. This support allows knowing
if there are studies not retrieved, but referenced.

As the search engines generally do not provide the list of references from each
study, this information is obtained by reading and extracting the references of the PDF
ﬁles of the retrieved studies. Every time a PDF ﬁle is linked to a study, StArt searches
the references in the PDF ﬁle. Aiming to identify information like authors, publication
place and title, regular expressions are used to identify the bibliographic reference
template that was used (APA, Harvard, IEEE, etc.). To determine which study is
related to another one, the similarity between the titles of the studies is calculated
using the text mining algorithm proposed by [12]. The result of this process is shown
through visualization as presented in Fig. 9. The study in the centre of the ﬁgure was
not retrieved in the literature review, but is referenced by ﬁve studies that were
retrieved.

This functionality is especially useful during the execution of pilot literature
reviews, which should be conducted for adjusting the protocol and the search strings,
as suggested by [8]. If there are studies not found but referenced many times, the

Using Information Visualization and Text Mining

253

Fig. 10. List of similar studies in relation to a selected study – the similarity grade is
highlighted.

researcher should verify, for example, if the keywords of these studies should be
considered in the protocol and search strings. If so, a new search applying these new
keywords must be performed aiming to ﬁnd relevant studies that were missed.

Start also offers the functionality for detecting which of the studies imported into
the tool are similar. The similarity is calculated based on the abstracts through Vector
Processing Model [13]. The result of this processing is shown in a table as presented in
Fig. 10. This table provides a list of similar studies and their respective similarity
grade in relation to a study previously selected.

This list of similar studies can be used, for example: (i) to deﬁne the next study to
be analyzed; (ii) to facilitate comparison between similar studies and (iii) to make the
inclusion and exclusion of studies easier – studies with a high level of similarity to an
excluded study tend to be also excluded.

Other researches use text mining in the context of SR or SM, but it is not available

in tools that support the whole SR or SM processes.

Malheiros et al. [14] proposed the use of a visualization tool, named PEx, to
support the ﬁrst step of studies selection. PEx has a module that processes the abstract
of the primary studies, eliminates stopwords, calculates the terms frequency and,
based on this result, displays clusters of studies to facilitate their analysis.

254

S. Fabbri et al.

Felizardo [15] continued the previous research and presented the VTM (Visual
Text Mining) tool which supports studies selection. As proposed by Malheiros [14],
the result of text mining processes is shown by different visualization techniques
which help applying the inclusion and exclusion criteria previously inserted in VTM
tool.

It is important to notice that the focus of these studies is the studies selection step.
On the other hand, in Start, visualization and text mining are currently being used to
support the search string deﬁnition and the SR or SM Summarization phase.

5 Related Tools

In the literature, there are some tools to support the management of bibliographic
references, which are commonly used by researchers to aid in the SLR process. The
purpose and the coverage of these tools are different and they are not related to the
SLR process proposed by Kitchenham [2], except for SLR Tool [16].

Only SLR Tool [16] focuses on Systematic Literature Review. However, its
installation requires the availability of a speciﬁc database management system and a
pre-conﬁguration of the environment, which can restrict its use, mainly by researchers
of other research areas such as Medicine and Nursing, who are also supporters of the
SLR process.

Another characteristic of SLR Tool is that it only works with the English and the
Spanish versions of the Windows operating system. StArt, on the other hand, can be
easily installed, since it has a simpliﬁed installer and it can also run with a copy of the
executable on the researchers’ machines. Table 1 presents related tools that were
analyzed and shows some of their features.

Table 1. Features of the StArt and the tools found in the literature.

Free Protocol
deﬁnition

Bibliographic
reference
manager

Citation
export

Attributes
customization

Automatic
classiﬁcation of
papers

Similar papers
identiﬁcation

JabRef
EndNote
ProCite
Reference

manager

Yes No
No No
No No
No No

RefWorks
No No
BibEdt
Yes No
Zotero
Yes No
Biblioscape No No
Yes No
Bookends
Library
No No

master
Mendeley
Mekentosj
SLR tool
StArt

No No
No No
Yes Yes
Yes Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No
No

No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
No
Yes

No
No
No
No

No
No
No
No
No
No

No
No
No
Yes

No
No
No
No

No
No
No
No
No
No

No
No
No
Yes

Using Information Visualization and Text Mining

255

6 Conclusions

This paper explored the use of visualization for making easier the interpretation of
data provided by Systematic Literature Review and Systematic Mapping. This visu-
alization is available in StArt, which also supports the steps of SR and SM processes.
As these processes are laborious, posses many repetitive steps and require that all
information is packed, the availability of computational support is relevant.

Although there are some tools that have been used by researches to aid the con-
duction of literature reviews, most of them are reference manager. Some examples are
JabRef (jabref.sourceforge.net), EndNote (www.endnote.com), ProCite (www.procite.
com), Reference Manager (www.refman.com), RefWorks (www.refworks.com) and
Zotero (www.zotero.org). Only SLR tool [16] focuses on SR process [8]. However, it
works only on the English or Spanish versions of the Windows operating system.

As StArt is closely associated to the SR and SM processes, it provides many
facilities that make easier the conduction of these types of reviews. Some charac-
teristics that differentiate it from the other tools are the score, which is calculated
automatically and can give insights on the paper relevance; different types of data
visualization that can aid to map the research area; extraction of the references of the
studies gathered in the review, that allows evaluating the adequacy of search strings
and improving the quality of the whole activity; and other facilities that make the
conduction of the process more manageable.

Considering the importance of packing the SRs or SMs data, StArt saves all data in
a ‘‘.start’’ ﬁle which allows conducting a review in sessions and sharing a review with
another researcher. In addition, as StArt provides a simple text editor for writing an
initial summary of the state of the art, this summary is also packed. StArt is being
continuously evolved and tested. The tool was also evaluated from the perspective of
its usefulness and ease of use, according to the TAM model, which found that the tool
is useful to users and can be easily used by researchers [6].

As future work, it is planned to continue the development of StArt emphasizing
the analysis related to Systematic Mappings. This objective has already initiated with
the addition of visualization, but there are other features that can enhance its support
for SM. Besides, it is planned some experimental studies that aim to establish a
strategy to improve search strings based on the references of the collected studies and
also to explore the tool as a support to conduct meta reviews.

Acknowledgements. The authors thank the students and researchers who have been used StArt
and are giving constant feedback to development team and CNPq, CAPES and Observatório da
Educação Project for ﬁnancial support.

References

1. Pai, M., McCulloch, M., Gorman, J.D., Pai, N., Enanoria, W., Kennedy, G., Tharyan, P.,
Colford Jr, J.M.: Clinical research methods - systematic reviews and meta-analyses: an
illustrated, step-by-step guide. Natl Med. J. India 17, 89–95 (2004)

256

S. Fabbri et al.

2. Kitchenham, B.A.: Procedures for performing systematic reviews. Software Engineering

Group, Keele University, Keele, Tech. Rep. TR/SE 0401 (2004)

3. Petersen, K., et al.: Systematic mapping studies in software engineering. In: Proceedings of
the International Conference on Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering, Bari,
Italy (2008)

4. Montebelo, R.P., et al.: SRAT (Systematic Review Automatic Tool) Uma Ferramenta
Computacional de Apoio à Revisão Sistemática. In: V Experimental Software Engineering
Latin American Workshop, ICMC-São Carlos (2007)

5. Zamboni, A.B., Thommazo, A.D., Hernandes, E.C.M., Fabbri, S.C.P.F.: StArt Uma
Ferramenta Computacional de Apoio à Revisão Sistemática. In: Brazilian Conference on
Software: Theory and Practice - Tools session, UFBA (2010)

6. Hernandes, E.C.M., Zamboni, A.B., Thommazo, A.D., Fabbri, S.C.P.F.: Avaliação da
ferramenta StArt utilizando o modelo TAM e o paradigma GQM. In: X Experimental
Software Engineering Latin American Workshop, ICMC-São Carlos (2010)

7. Burley, D.: Information visualization as a knowledge integration tool. J. Knowl. Manage.

Pract. 11 (2010)

8. Kitchenham, B.A.: Guidelines for performing systematic literature reviews in software.
Software Engineering Group, Keele University, Keele, University of Durham, Durham,
Tech. Rep. EBSE-2007-01 (2007)

9. Gershon, N., Eick, S.G., Card, S.: Information visualization interactions. ACM Interact. 5,

9–15 (1998) (ACM Press)

10. Dunne, C., Shneiderman, B., Gove, R., Klavans, J., Dorr, B.: Rapid understanding of
scientiﬁc paper collections: integrating statistics, text analytics, and visualization. JASIST:
J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol. 63, 2351–2369 (2012)

11. Boell, S.K., Cezec-Kecmanovic, D.: Are systematic reviews better, less biased and of
higher quality? In: Proceedings of the European Conference on Information Systems,
Helsinki, Finland (2010)

12. Salton, G.: Automatic Text Processing: The Transformation, Analysis and Retrieval of

Information by Computer. Addison-Wesley, Reading (1989)

13. Salton, G., Allan, J.: Text retrieval using the vector processing model. In: Symposium on

Document Analysis and Information Retrieval. University of Nevada, Las Vegas (1994)

14. Malheiros, V., Höhn, E., Pinho, R., Mendonça, M., Maldonado, J.C.: A visual text mining
approach for systematic reviews. In: International Symposium on Empirical Software
Engineering and Measurement, ESEM, pp. 245–254 (2007)

15. Felizardo, K.R., et al.: Using visual text mining to support the study selection activity in
International Symposium on Empirical Software

systematic literature reviews.
Engineering and Measurement, ESEM, pp. 77–86 (2011)

In:

16. Fernández-Sáez, A.M., Genero, M., Romero, F.P.: SLR-Tool: a tool for performing

systematic literature reviews. In: Proceedings of the JISBD, pp. 329–332 (2010)

