690

Cohen et al., Cross-Topic Learning for Systematic Reviews

Research Paper 䡲
Cross-Topic Learning for Work Prioritization in Systematic
Review Creation and Update

AARON M. COHEN, MD, MS, KYLE AMBERT, MARIAN MCDONAGH, PHARMD

A b s t r a c t Objective: Machine learning systems can be an aid to experts performing systematic reviews
(SRs) by automatically ranking journal articles for work-prioritization. This work investigates whether a topic-
speciﬁc automated document ranking system for SRs can be improved using a hybrid approach, combining topic-
speciﬁc training data with data from other SR topics.
Design: A test collection was built using annotated reference ﬁles from 24 systematic drug class reviews. A
support vector machine learning algorithm was evaluated with cross-validation, using seven different fractions of
topic-speciﬁc training data in combination with samples from the other 23 topics. This approach was compared to
both a baseline system, which used only topic-speciﬁc training data, and to a system using only the nontopic data
sampled from the remaining topics.
Measurements: Mean area under the receiver-operating curve (AUC) was used as the measure of comparison.
Results: On average, the hybrid system improved mean AUC over the baseline system by 20%, when topic-
speciﬁc training data were scarce. The system performed signiﬁcantly better than the baseline system at all levels
of topic-speciﬁc training data. In addition, the system performed better than the nontopic system at all but the two
smallest fractions of topic speciﬁc training data, and no worse than the nontopic system with these smallest
amounts of topic speciﬁc training data.
Conclusions: Automated literature prioritization could be helpful in assisting experts to organize their time when
performing systematic reviews. Future work will focus on extending the algorithm to use additional sources of
topic-speciﬁc data, and on embedding the algorithm in an interactive system available to systematic reviewers
during the literature review process.
䡲 J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2009;16:690–704. DOI 10.1197/jamia.M3162.

Introduction and Background
Systematic reviews (SRs) locate, appraise, and synthesize the
best available evidence from clinical studies of diagnosis,
treatment, prognosis, or etiology, to provide informative
empiric answers to speciﬁc research questions.1 They also
provide input to medical recommendations and often form
the basis for many Health Technology Reports, formal
decision analyses, clinical practice guidelines, and economic
analyses. Furthermore, SRs are an essential component of
evidence-based medicine (EBM), guiding both practice and
policy.2– 4 Several groups coordinate the creation of SRs,
such as the Cochrane Collaboration and the Evidence-based

Afﬁliations of the authors: Department of Medical Informatics and
Clinical Epidemiology, School of Medicine, Oregon Health & Sci-
ence University, Portland, OR.
This work was supported by grant 1R01LM009501-01 from the
National Library of Medicine.
The authors wish to acknowledge the Drug Evidence Review
Project (DERP) of the Oregon EPC for providing the original review
inclusion data in the form of Endnote ﬁles.
Correspondence: Aaron M. Cohen, Department of Medical Infor-
matics, Clinical Epidemiology, School of Medicine, Oregon Health
& Science University, 3181 S. W. Sam Jackson Park Road, Mail Code:
BICC, Portland, OR 97239-3098; e-mail: ⬍cohenaa@ohsu.edu⬎.
Received for review: 02/02/09; accepted for publication: 05/29/09.

Practice Centers (EPCs) of the Agency for Healthcare Re-
search and Quality (AHRQ).3,5 Many SRs focus on speciﬁc
classes of pharmacological therapies, or on treatments re-
lated to a speciﬁc disease.
Systematic Reviews leverage the time and experience of
independent experts on SR who use the latest scientiﬁc and
statistical techniques to construct a summary of the best
information and practices in an area of medicine with as
little bias as possible. This approach has many strengths, but
one particularly motivating aspect of this process is that it
frees individual physicians from having to review all the
available literature themselves, thus enabling them to focus
on administering the best possible care to their patients. In
constructing an SR, the review team attempts to synthesize
all the available evidence about a class of drugs or medical
conditions into a set of conclusions that reﬂect the highest-
quality knowledge and the highest level of care available at
the time of the review. Some SRs include a meta-analysis,
which is an aggregation of the results obtained in speciﬁc
individual studies by pooling data from similar studies for a
speciﬁc outcome and performing subsequent statistical anal-
yses on the pooled data.6 Meta-analyses can make important
contributions to our understanding of the true effectiveness
of a medical intervention, improving our conﬁdence in a
ﬁnding by extending the precision and consistency beyond
that of a single study. Selection of appropriately similar

