2011 International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement

Using Visual Text Mining to Support the Study

Selection Activity in Systematic Literature Reviews

Katia R. Felizardo

Depart. of Computer Science

University of São Paulo 

Brazil

katiarf@icmc.usp.br

Norsaremah Salleh

Depart. of Computer Science

International Islamic 
University Malaysia

norsaremah@iium.edu.my

Rafael M. Martins

Emilia Mendes

Depart. of Computer Science 

University of São Paulo 

Depart. of Computer Science 

University of Auckland 

Brazil 

rafaelmm@icmc.usp.br

New Zealand

emilia@auckland.ac.nz

Stephen G. MacDonell

SERL, Comp. & Math. Sciences - AUT University

Auckland, New Zealand

stephen.macdonell@aut.ac.nz

José C. Maldonado

Depart. of Computer Science
University of São Paulo, Brazil

jcmaldon@icmc.usp.br

Abstract— Background:  A  systematic literature  review  (SLR) 
is  a  methodology  used  to  aggregate  all  relevant  existing 
evidence  to  answer  a  research  question  of  interest.  Although 
crucial,  the  process  used  to  select  primary  studies  can  be 
arduous,  time  consuming,  and  must  often  be  conducted 
manually. Objective: We propose a novel approach, known as 
‘Systematic  Literature  Review  based  on  Visual  Text  Mining’ 
or  simply  SLR-VTM,  to  support  the  primary  study  selection 
activity  using  visual  text  mining  (VTM)  techniques.  Method: 
We  conducted  a  case  study  to  compare  the  performance  and 
effectiveness  of  four  doctoral  students  in  selecting  primary 
studies  manually  and  using  the  SLR-VTM  approach.  To 
enable  the  comparison,  we  also  developed  a  VTM  tool  that 
implemented  our  approach.  We  hypothesized  that  students 
using  SLR-VTM  would  present 
selection 
performance and effectiveness. Results: Our results show that 
incorporating VTM in the SLR study selection activity reduced 
the time spent in this activity and also increased the number of 
studies  correctly  included.  Conclusions:  Our  pilot  case  study 
presents promising results suggesting that the use of VTM may 
indeed  be  beneficial  during  the  study  selection  activity  when 
performing an SLR.

improved 

Keywords-Evidence-based  software  engineering  (EBSE);
systematic literature review (SLR); study selection activity, visual 
text mining (VTM).

I.

INTRODUCTION

The systematic literature review (SLR) is recognized as 
one of the key components of the Evidence-Based Software 
Engineering (EBSE) paradigm [1]. It provides reliable means 
and  established  methods  to  conduct  a  comprehensive  and 
robust literature review based on three clearly defined phases 
[1]: (i) planning the review; (ii) conducting the review; and 
(iii)  reporting  the  review.  During  the  planning  phase,  the 
need  for  a  review  is  identified  and  the  review  protocol  is 
developed. The activities during the second phase include the 
identification  of  relevant  research,  selection  of  primary 
studies  based  on  the  inclusion  and  exclusion  criteria, 
assessment  of  study  quality,  data  extraction  and  data 

978-0-7695-4604-9/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ESEM.2011.16

77

synthesis. Finally, the third phase includes dissemination or 
reporting of the SLR’s results to interested parties including 
researchers and practitioners [2]. 

The  substantial  growth  in  the  number  of  SLRs  being 
undertaken  in  the  area  of  software  engineering  (SE)  lends 
weight  to  the  importance  of  carrying  out  SLR  activities 
effectively and efficiently [3]. Due to the comprehensive and 
rigorous  nature  of  the  work  required  when  performing  an 
SLR,  its  undertaking  may  be  difficult  and  time  consuming 
principally  because  some  of  the  activities  are  conducted 
manually. In particular, the selection of primary studies can 
be arduous when an SLR involves a large volume of possibly 
relevant studies; consequently, it can be challenging to read, 
evaluate,  and  synthesize  the  state  of  the  art  of  a  particular 
topic of interest. It would seem advantageous to have a range 
of tools or techniques that could support the SLR activities, 
in  particular  the  study  selection  activity.  We  contend  here 
that  the  exploration  and  analysis  of  a  large  set  of  primary 
studies  can  be  supported  by  the  technique  of  Visual  Text 
Mining (VTM) [4].

information  visualization 

Text  Mining  is  a  well-established  practice  commonly 
used  to  extract  patterns  and  non-trivial  knowledge  from 
unstructured  documents  or  textual  documents  written  in  a 
natural  language  [5].  As  an  extension  of  this  idea,  Visual 
Text Mining (VTM) is the association of mining algorithms 
and 
that  support 
visualization  and  interactive  data  exploration  [6].  In  recent 
years,  there  has  been  an  increasing  interest  in  the  use  of 
visualization techniques as supporting tools for SLRs [7, 8, 
9,  10].  This  interest  is  motivated  by  the  fact  that  humans 
present  strong  visual  processing  abilities;  therefore  visual-
based  techniques  make  use  of  these  abilities,  by  using  the 
human system to support knowledge discovery [4] i.e., in the 
SLR context, to discover the relevant primary studies.

techniques 

The  aim  of  this  paper  is  to  propose  and  evaluate  an 
the  SLR-VTM  (Systematic 
approach  based  on  VTM, 
Literature Review based on Visual Text Mining) to support 
the selection of primary studies in an SLR, offering different 
perspectives 
i.e.,

those  considered 

in  prior  work 

to 

visualizations based on the content of the studies and based 
on  their  citation  relationship.  The  specific  contributions  of 
our  work  to  the  body  of  knowledge  in  this  field  are  the 
following:  (i)  a  new  VTM  approach  containing  different 
visualizations and strategies to assist the selection of primary 
studies;  (ii)  an  automated  tool  to  support  the  selection 
activity in SLRs; and (iii) empirical evidence regarding the 
effects of the use of VTM in an EBSE context. 

The remainder  of  this paper  is  organized as  follows.  In 
Section  2,  background  information  is  provided  regarding
related  work  on  both  the  SLR  process  and  VTM;  the 
motivation  of  this  research  is  also  elaborated.  Section  3 
presents our proposed approach, as well as a supporting tool, 
named  Revis.  In  Section  4  we  detail 
the  research 
methodology employed in our pilot case study, followed by 
the detailing of results, lessons learned and limitations of this 
work in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 concludes our work.

II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK

informal 

The  bibliographical  or 

literature  reviews 
frequently  seen  in  the  literature  do  not  use  a  systematic 
approach;  hence  one  cannot  rule  out  that  the  choice  of 
studies  and  the  conclusions  drawn  could  be  biased,  thus 
providing  readers  with  a  distorted  view  about  the  state  of 
knowledge  regarding  the  area  at  the  focus  of  the  review. 
Conversely,  an  SLR  uses  a  systematic  process  to  identify, 
assess and interpret all available research evidence aiming at 
providing reliable  answers to a  particular research question 
[11], [3]. An SLR is considered to be a sound methodology 
that can be used to identify publications related to a specific 
subject via a predefined search strategy aimed at minimizing 
bias  [1].  Considering  its  growing  relevance  in  the  field  of 
software  engineering  (SE),  this  methodology  has  been 
increasingly  applied  by  researchers  and  practitioners  in 
various  topics  of  interest  [2],  [12].  In  addition,  due  to  the 
increasing  number  of  primary  studies  in  SE,  it  would  be 
advantageous to have an efficient mechanism to summarize 
and provide an overview about an area or topic of interest in 
this field [13]. 

Knowledge  Discovery  in  Databases  (KDD)  has  been 
applied in other fields to extract high-level, potentially useful 
knowledge  from  low-level  data  [4].  Data  Mining  (DM), 
which  is  one  of  the  components  of  the  KDD  process,  has 
been used to extract patterns or models from data. In order to 
support the  KDD  process,  a  visualization technique  can  be 
combined  with  DM,  resulting  in  a  Visual  Data  Mining 
process (VDM) [4], [6].  In VDM, a visualization technique 
supports  user 
the  mining  algorithm, 
facilitating  productive  and  effective  discovery  methods  [4]. 
By  extension,  Visual  Text  Mining  (VTM)  refers  to  VDM 
applied  in  text  or  to  a  collection  of  documents  [6].  VTM 
combines 
interactive 
visualizations. As such, we contend that it can provide useful 
support to users who need to make sense of a collection of 
primary  studies,  helping  them  to  decide  which  studies  to 
include in an SLR. 

algorithms  with 

interaction  with 

text  mining 

Several studies have investigated the potential benefits of 
visualization in supporting the conduct of an SLR. El Emam 
et  al.  [7]  investigated  the  use  of  Electronic  Data  Capture 

(EDC) tools to provide automated support for data collection 
and query resolution, among other features, for clinical trials 
during an SLR process. Despite their focus being on the use 
of electronic data capture tools,  the study selection activity 
is  still manually  conducted. Ananiadou  et al. [9]  employed 
text mining tools to  support three different activities  of the 
SLR process: (i) search, (ii) study selection activity – using 
document classification and document clustering techniques 
– and (iii) syntheses of the data; however their focus is in the 
social sciences field. In addition, two previous studies [8, 10] 
have  specifically  investigated  the  use  of  VTM  within  the 
context  of  EBSE.  Felizardo  et  al.  [8]  employed  VTM  to 
support  categorization  and  classification  of  studies  when 
carrying out systematic mapping studies; and Malheiros et al. 
[10]  investigated  the  use  of  VTM  techniques  to  help  with 
SLRs,  using  a  feasibility  study.  They  compared 
the 
performance of reviewers in selecting primary studies using 
two different methods: (i) reading abstracts; and (ii) using a 
VTM approach. Their results were promising, showing that 
the  use  of  VTM  can  both  reduce  the  time  required  and 
improve the effectiveness of the selection of primary studies. 
However, a time limit was imposed on the conduct of their 
experiment. In addition, none  of these  previous  studies has 
investigated  the  use  of  meta-data  analysis,  for  example, 
citation network, to assist the selection activity. 

Similar  to  Malheiros  et  al.'s  work  [10],  the  approach 
presented herein also makes use of VTM to support the study 
selection activity in the process of SLR. However, our work 
differs  from  that  of  Malheiros  et  al.  by  supporting  the 
selection of primary studies using content-based analysis of 
documents  (document  map),  and  meta-data  analysis,  via 
representations such as edge bundles and citation networks. 
In their study, Malheiros et al. used the document map as a 
single  visualization  technique  to  support  the  selection 
activity. The document map used as its basis the content of 
the  papers  (i.e.,  titles,  abstracts,  keywords)  whereas  in  our 
case,  the  other  two  visualization  techniques  used  citations 
among  studies  and  shared  references  between  studies  to 
indicate  citation  relationships.  Such  information  would 
appear to be useful in supporting the decision process when 
selecting papers.
III.

SYSTEMATIC LITERATURE REVIEW BASED ON VISUAL 

TEXT MINING (SLR-VTM)

The Systematic Literature Review based on Visual Text 
Mining  (SLR-VTM)  is  an  approach  to  support  primary 
studies’  selection  during the  SLR  process.  As illustrated  in 
Figure  1, the approach  comprises  four  stages: (i) planning; 
(ii)  search  process;  (iii)  visualization;  and  (iv)  VTM 
selection.  The  first  stage  is  carried  out  according  to 
procedures defined by Kitchenham and Charters [1]. During 
Stage  1  (Planning),  the  SLR  protocol  is  defined.  The 
protocol  contains,  for  example,  the  research  question(s), 
source search methods, inclusion and exclusion criteria and 
the  primary  studies’  selection  process,  among  others.  In 
Stage 2 (Search process), primary studies are identified using 
each  of  the  source  searches  previously  documented  in  the 
protocol. Stage 3 (Visualization) involves the generation of 
visual  representations  of  the  primary  studies  obtained  in 

78

Stage  2.  In  Stage 4  (VTM  Selection),  the relevant  primary 
studies are selected (or discarded) applying the inclusion and 

exclusion  criteria.  We  have  investigated  the  application  of 
VTM to Stages 3 and 4, discussed in more detail next.

Figure 1. Systematic Literature Review based on VTM.

A. Visualization Stage

to 

and 

content 

investigate 

In this stage three visual representations of the primary 
studies previously  selected  are  generated: (i) a  document 
map; (ii) edge bundles and (iii) a citation network. Each is 
described as follows:
• A  document  map  (see  Figure  2a)  is  a  2D  visual 
representation  of      the  primary  studies,  and  enables 
users 
similarity 
relationships  between  these  studies.  The  process  to 
create a document map involves the conversion of all 
primary studies selected (title, abstract and keywords) 
into multi-dimensional vectors. The dimensionality is 
based  on  all  the  terms  extracted  from  the  primary 
studies.  The  dimensionality  of  these  vectors  can  be 
reduced  eliminating  stopwords 
(i.e.,  minimally 
representative terms, such as prepositions, articles and 
conjunctions),  applying  stemming  (i.e.,  converting 
terms  to  their  radical;  for  instance,  ‘testing’  and 
‘tester’ are both reduced to ‘test’) and using projection 
techniques  [14].  In  short,  projection  techniques  map 
each primary study to a graphical element represented 
by a circle; circles are then placed on the 2D layout in 
a  way  that  reflects  similarity  relationships.  Thus, 
similar documents are placed close to one another and 
dissimilar  documents  are  positioned  far  apart.  The 
document map also shows regions that group primary 
studies  based  on 
is 
calculated  using  the  cosine  similarity  measure,  often 
used  to  compare  documents  in  text  mining.  It  is  a 
measure  of  similarity  between  two  vectors  of  n 
dimensions by finding the cosine of the angle between 
them,  which  ranges  between  0  (no  similarity)  and  1 
(completely  similar)  [15].  More  details  about  the 
process to create the document map can be found in 
Felizardo et al. [8].
The  edge  bundle  was  defined  by  Holten  [16]  as  a 
hierarchical  tree  visualization  technique  that  shows 
both  nodes  and  node-links  (relationships  between 

their  similarity.  Similarity 

•

•

nodes) at the same time. In our case, the nodes (small 
circles, see Figure 2b) are the primary studies and the 
node-links (blue lines) are the citations between them. 
In  order  to  create  the  hierarchical  tree  we  used  the 
HiPP (Hierarchical Point Placement) strategy [17] and 
the node-links were coloured to represent the direction 
of the citation: the citing paper is at the light blue end 
of the link and the cited paper at the dark blue end. 
Finally,  the  citation  network  shows  the  primary 
studies  (central  point  –  circle)  with  their  cited 
references (circles around the central point, connected 
by edges). Through this depiction it is possible to see 
citations between the primary studies with their own 
references and also citations between primary studies 
and  references  of  other  primary  studies  (references 
shared  –  see  Figure  2c).  The  citation  network 
visualization  uses  a  force-based  algorithm  [18]  to 
position  the  points  on  the  layout.  This  means  that 
studies attract or repel one another depending on how 
strong their connections (references to each other) are. 
Primary studies that do not share references (isolated 
primary  studies)  are  disconnected  from  the  other 
studies in the network. 

B. VTM Selection Stage

the  selection  activity  using 

During this stage the primary studies’ selection activity 
takes  place.  We  propose  that  the  VTM  approach  can 
support 
three  different 
visualization  methods; 
their  respective  strategies  of 
exploration are detailed next. 
• Document  Map:  There  are  three  VTM  techniques 
(see  Figures  3b, 3c and  3d)  that  can  be  applied to a 
document map (see Figure 3a):
o Clusters  and  Topics:  One  strategy  to  classify 
primary  studies 
the  regions 
(clusters)  of  documents  with  similar  content  in 
terms  of  their  titles,  abstracts  and  keywords. 
Using 
technique,  clusters  are  created 
automatically followed by the formation of their 

identify 

this 

to 

is 

79

less 

thoroughly) 

associated  topics.  These  topics  are  labels  that 
represent the content of the documents contained 
in  the  clusters.  In  order  to  efficiently  include 
groups of primary studies, a user can concentrate 
their  reading  on  documents  that  belong  to  the 
clusters  labeled  with  topics  that  most  closely 
match the SLR’s research questions. Similarly, in 
order  to  exclude  studies,  a  user  can  review 
(perhaps 
the  documents 
belonging to  clusters labeled  with topics  that do 
not match their SLR’s research questions. Figure 
3b shows a document map after the clusters and 
topics technique was applied. The colour of each 
point  represents  the  cluster  it  belongs  to  and 
topics appear inside boxes.
o Expression Occurrence: This technique changes 
the colour of each point in the document map in 
order to represent the frequency of occurrence of 
specific  user-defined  expressions  in  the  primary 
studies. In this case, the colour scale varies from 
black  (i.e.,  no  occurrence)  to  white  (i.e.,  many 
occurrences).  A  user  can  then  prioritize  their 

reading towards documents coloured in white (or 
closer to white) in order to consider whether these 
documents  should  be  included  in  the  SLR. 
Conversely,  a  user  can  read  the  documents 
coloured  in  black  (or  closer  to  this  colour)  to 
determine  whether 
those  documents  should 
indeed be excluded from the SLR (assuming, of 
course, 
is 
relevant).  Figure  3c 
the  coloured 
document  map  using  this  technique,  where  the 
white point indicates the maximum occurrence of 
an expression.

the  user-defined  expression 

illustrates 

that 

o KNN  Edges  Connection 

(Neighborhood 
Relationship):  This  technique  connects  primary 
studies  with  their  neighbors  to  support  study 
inclusion  by  association.  That  is,  the  closer  the 
neighbors  of  an  included  study  are  the  more 
likely  they  are  to  be  also  relevant  to  the  SLR. 
Likewise, the neighbors of an excluded study are 
more likely to be irrelevant and so should not be 
included. Figure 3d shows the points connected to 
identify their neighborhood.

(a) Document Map

(b) Edge Bundles

a. In general, visualization techniques employ colour in order to add extra information on a visual representation. We suggest the reading of a colour print version of this paper.

(c) Citation Network

Figure 2. The three different views created in the Visualization Stage.

80

(a) Document Map

(b) Clusters and Topics

(c) Expression Occurrence

(d) KNN Connection

Figure 3. The three different VTM techniques (b-d) that can be applied to the document map (a).

• Edge  Bundles:  A relevant  paper  is usually  cited  by 
other  papers.  The  edge  bundles  can  be  used  to 
visualize the number of times that a paper is cited and 
papers that are cited many times are strong candidates 
to become primary studies to include in the SLR, or at 
least  given  due  attention  by  the  user.  On  the  other 
hand, papers that are not cited, or cited very little, may 
be indicative of studies that should not be included in 
the SLR.

• Citation  Network:  This  view  offers 

important 
additional  information  beyond  that  related  to  the 
initial  set  of  documents,  in  particular  a  primary 
studies’  references  and  the  connections  between 
papers  via  the  set  of  references  that  they  share. 
Reference lists from relevant primary studies could be 
other sources of evidence to be searched [1]. Hence, 
papers  that  share  references  with  a  relevant  paper 
could  be more  appropriate  for inclusion in  the  SLR. 
On  the  other  hand,  primary  studies  that  are  not 
connected  to  any  other  studies  (i.e.,  do  not  share 
citations  or  references),  are  more 
to  be 
irrelevant documents in terms of the research question 
and may therefore be more readily excluded from the 
SLR.

likely 

The strategies just mentioned can be applied iteratively 
in order to adequately seek primary studies, as depicted in 
the  various  visual  representations.  The  number  of 
iterations  is  determined  by  the  user  and  should  continue 
until all primary studies have been considered. Moreover, 
the user can combine the techniques using  coordination, 
which represents an interaction among the different views 
(i.e., document maps, edge bundles, and citation network).  
Using coordination, once a point or a group of documents
in a view is selected, the corresponding point (or points) is 
then highlighted in the other views. Figure 4 illustrates the 
coordination  of  the  three  views.  In  Figure  4a,  the 
document numbered as 1 is cited most frequently (see edge 
bundles  view,  Figure  4b)  and  it  has  the  maximum 
occurrence  of  a  specific  and  relevant  expression  in  the 
context of their SLR question research (see document map 
view,  Figure  4a).  Hence, 
the  user  has  additional 
information  about  document  1  that  could  support  their 
decision on whether to include the study in the SLR. The 
citation  network  (see  Figure  4c)  shows  that  document  1 
and  its  closest  neighbors  (i.e.,  documents  2  and  3)  also 
share their references. Analysis of the edge bundles view 
(Figure 4b) shows that document 1 is cited by document 2. 
Thus,  if  document  1  is  considered  appropriate  to  be 

81

included in the SLR, then it is likely that documents 2 and 
3 are also to be included. Various other combinations can 
be  used  all  aiming  at  supporting  inclusion/exclusion 
decisions.  Users  should  employ  the  views  to  obtain 
additional information in relation to the document set or to 

individual studies. Note that at any point a user can refer to 
the abstract/full  text  of  any  study,  by  double  clicking  on 
the  relevant  point  in  a  visual  representation.  In  the  next 
section, we present our tool that can be used to automate 
Stages 3 and 4 of the SLR-VTM approach.

(a)

(b)

Figure 4. Coordination between the three visualizations.

(c)

C. Support Tool: REVIS – Systematic Literature Review 

Supported by Visual Analytics
Revis  –  Systematic  Literature  Review  Supported  by 
Visual  Analytics  –  is  a  flexible  visualization  tool  that 
enables  a  user  to  leverage  several  VTM  capabilities  to 
explore  a  collection  of  documents  (primary  studies). 
Figure 5 shows the Revis tool’s main window. Revis takes 
as input a set of primary studies selected during Stage 2 of 
the  SLR-VTM  approach.  These  studies  are  organized 
according to the bibtex format, which includes their title, 
abstract,  keywords,  and  references.    Revis  then  executes 
the  activities  performed  during  SLR-VTM  Stage  3  and 
presents  the  document  map,  edge  bundles  and  citation 
network for the document set.

The  main  VTM  functionalities  offered  by  Revis  are 
described as follows: - it creates the views: document map, 
edge bundles and citation network; - it applies clustering 
algorithms in order to create clusters and their respective 
topics; - it allows changing of visual attributes (colour) of 
the points in the document map to represent the frequency 
of  occurrence  of  an  expression  in  the  documents,  or  the 
status  of  the  document  (i.e.,  green  circles  represent    the 
included studies and red the excluded);  - it allows users to 
explore neighborhood relationships in the document map, 
with  neighboring  connections  (called  KNN  connections)  
shown  as  edges  between 
the  points;  -  it  supports 
coordination between different views, the document map, 
edge bundles and citation network; - it displays the content 
of  a  document  (i.e.,  title,  abstract  and  keywords)  in  a 
separate window when the user double clicks a node.  

82

Figure 5. Main Window of Revis. 

Excluding or including a document can be done easily 
by  clicking the right-hand  mouse  button  over the  “Table 
View” pane and choosing one of the options shown in the 
pop-up  window.  This  scenario  is  illustrated  on  the  right 
pane of Figure 5. The points are coloured as red or green 
according to their exclusion or inclusion respectively. An 
example is illustrated in Figure 6. Note that, as described 
previously,  those  included  documents  that  have  similar 
content are positioned near to each other in the document 
map,  illustrating  that  the  neighbors  of  an  included 
study are more likely to be relevant. In general they cited 
one  another  frequently  and  also  share  references  in 
common.    Figure  6  also  shows  that  the  neighbors  of  an 
excluded study are more likely to be irrelevant and that all 
thee outliers (isolated studies, red point – see citation map 
(c)) are classified as excluded.

In  the next  section  we  present a  pilot  case  study  that 
empirically  assesses  the  utility  of  the  Revis  tool and  our 
proposed VTM techniques.

IV.

PILOT CASE STUDY: INVESTIGATING THE USE OF 

VTM TECHNIQUES TO SUPPORT STUDY SELECTION
In  order  to  validate  our  SLR-VTM  approach  we 
conducted  a  pilot  case  study  involving  PhD  students.  In 

83

this paper, we argue that VTM techniques can support the 
SLR  process’  study  selection  activity.  Previous  findings 
reported  by  Malheiros  et  al.  [10]  show  that  the  use  of 
VTM  reduces  the  time  taken  to  perform  the  selection 
activity and also improves the number of papers correctly 
included or excluded in SLRs. However, their study used 
just one type of visualization (i.e., the document map). In 
our  study,  we  applied  this  same  visualization  technique 
plus another two  new  visualization  techniques (i.e.,  edge 
bundles  and  citation  network).  Hence,  our  empirical 
research questions (RQ) are:

• RQ1: Do VTM techniques (document map, edge 
bundles,  and  citation  network) 
the 
performance  (time  taken)  of  the  study  selection 
activity in the SLR process?

improve 

of 

• RQ2:  Do  VTM 

techniques 

the 
effectiveness 
the 
inclusion/exclusion) of the study selection activity 
in the SLR process?

(correctness 

improve 

The research objectives, the instruments and procedure 
used  in  this  case  study  are  detailed  in  the  following 
subsections, followed by the results obtained. 

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 6. Views after completion of the selection activity, where included studies are coloured in green and excluded in red.

A. Pilot Case Study Research Objectives

This case study aimed to investigate the use of VTM 
techniques  to  support  the  study  selection  activity  of  the 
SLR  process.  The  objectives  of  our  case  study  were 
outlined using the Goal/Question Metric template (GQM) 
[19]  and  the  goal  definition  for  the  case  study  is  the 
following:

• Object of study: VTM techniques.
•

Purpose:  To  improve  the  performance  and  the 
effectiveness  of 
the  primary  study  selection 
activity in SLR process. 
Focus: To investigate the use of VTM techniques 
(using  the  Revis  tool)  during  the  study  selection 
activity.
Perspective:  From  the  point  of  view  of  the 
researcher.

•

•

• Context: In the context of PhD student work. 
We  contend  that  the  VTM  techniques  will  positively 
influence  the  performance  and  effectiveness  of  PhD 
students  undertaking  the  selection  of  primary  studies. 
Therefore, we have investigated whether or not the use of 
VTM techniques affects the productivity of students who 
performed the selection of primary studies during an SLR. 
Four PhD students participated in this pilot case study, and 
all had prior experience in conducting SLRs.
B.

Instrumentation and Procedure
At  the  start  of  the  case  study,  one  of  the  authors 
provided  all  participants  with  an  overview  of  the  case 
study, which was organized in two stages: (i) training; and 
(ii)  execution.  Participants  were  split  randomly  into  two 
groups,  one  to  conduct  the  study  selection  activity 
manually  (group  1)  and  another  to  conduct  the  study 
selection activity using the VTM approach (group 2). For 
training  purposes,  we  used  a  small  set  of  data  (i.e.,  20 
primary  studies)  and  a  specific  set  of  inclusion  and 
exclusion  criteria.  Participants  in  group  1  classified  the 
primary  studies  as  included  or  excluded  based  on  their 
reading of the abstracts. They were presented with the list 
of  papers  to  be  analysed  (the  titles,  abstracts,  and 

keywords), the inclusion and exclusion criteria, and a table 
to summarize the decision whether to include or exclude a 
study. 

Only  participants  in  group  2  were  trained  on  how  to 
use the Revis tool so that they were familiar with the VTM 
techniques  and  the  case  study  form.  As  part  of  the  case 
study,  they  were  given  a  description  of  the  VTM 
techniques, the inclusion/exclusion criteria, and a table to 
summarize  the  decision  whether  to  include  or  exclude  a 
study. During the training stage, participants' doubts about 
the reading process, the tool, the VTM techniques or the 
form were clarified. To ensure that first impressions from 
the  training  would  not  interfere  with  the  case  study,  we 
used  a  different  and  larger  set  of  data  (set  2)  for  the 
execution  stage.  During  this  stage,  the  primary  studies 
selection activity was carried out using set 2. This set of 
studies came from an SLR conducted and double checked 
by  an  expert  in  SLR,  who  is  a  collaborator  from  our 
research group. We used their opinion to define the studies 
that should be included or excluded.

As in the training stage, group 1 read the abstracts and 
group  2  used  the  Revis  tool  and  applied  the  VTM 
techniques.  Participants  were  required  to  record  the  time 
they took to execute the selection activity. This allowed us 
to measure the  time  spent  on  the  selection activity  as an 
indicator of performance.
C. Results

This section presents the results of our pilot case study 
in  order  to  address  our  specific  research  questions  (RQ1 
and RQ2). A summary of results is presented in Table 1. 
Note that no statistical significance tests were used due to 
the very small sample employed.

To  answer  our  first  research  question  (RQ1),  we 
measured participants’ performance as the time they spent 
undertaking  the  execution  stage  (i.e.  the  time  spent  by 
reviewers to make their decisions, which does not  include 
the  time  to  prepare  the  data  for  the  tool)  (see  Table  1  –
third column).

84

Our results  showed  that the  time taken  by  students  1 
and 2 to perform the study selection activity on the basis of 
reading the abstracts was 85 and 54 minutes respectively; 
and the time taken by students 3 and 4 to perform the same 
activity using the VTM approach was 30 and 58 minutes 
respectively.  The  performance  of  the  students  using  the 
VTM appeared to be either equivalent to or better than that 
of the students using the manual method.

TABLE I. 

SUMMARY OF RESULTS.

Approach

Student

Performance
(Time spent)

Reading 
Abstract
(Group 1)

VTM 
strategies
(Group 2)

#1
#2
#3
#4

85 min
54 min
30 min
58 min

Correctness

Included/
Excluded 
Correctly

Included/
Excluded 
Incorrectly

25
22
27
28

12
15
10
9

of 

The 

number 

Table  1  (see  fourth  and  fifth  columns)  shows  the 
comparison  between 
the  VTM  and  manual  reading 
approaches  in  terms  of  the  number  of  studies  correctly 
included/excluded.
studies 
included/excluded  correctly  using  the  manual  reading 
approach  was  lower  than  if  using  the  VTM  approach.
Students  1  and  2  (using  the  reading  approach)  correctly 
included/excluded 25 and 22 papers respectively, whereas 
students  3  and  4  (using  the  VTM  approach)  correctly 
included/excluded  27  and  28  papers,  respectively. One 
important  point  about  this  result  is  that  the  students 
generally selected the same correct studies (i.e. the range 
of  correctly 
identified  studies  not  varied  widely). 
Considering the studies incorrectly judged, only  student 2, 
who read the abstracts, had more false-negative decisions 
(i.e.  relevant  studies  excluded  –  5  studies)  than  false-
positive  (i.e.  irrelevant  studies  included  –  10  studies), 
which are more serious and difficult to correct in an SLR 
than the first ones.

Our results therefore suggest that the use of the VTM 
approach can help to improve the performance of the study 
selection activity in the SLR when compared to a manual 
reading method. The results also show that the outcomes 
of  the  selection  of  the  primary  studies  may  be  more 
reliable  when  using  the  VTM  approach.  Our  evidence 
overall therefore suggests that the application of the VTM 
techniques is  promising as, in  this  case, it maintained  or 
improved  both  the  performance  and  effectiveness  of 
primary studies selection.

V.

DISCUSSION

In this section we discuss issues related to the results 
we obtained in our case study and the limitations or threats 
to the validity of our findings.  Based on our results, we 
found that  the application  of  the VTM  techniques in the 
study  selection  activity  has  provided  some  benefits;  in 
particular, it appears to accelerate the selection of primary 
studies  and  ameliorates  the  identification  of  relevant 
and/or irrelevant papers. 

85

Keim  [4]  highlighted  that  visualizing  and  exploring 
information using VDM would help the user to deal with 
vast  amounts  of  data,  or  in  our  case,  large  numbers  of 
primary studies. This is because the visualization supports 
user  interaction  with  the  mining  algorithm  and  directs  it 
towards  a  suitable  solution  to  a  given  task.  Moreover, 
VDM can be used to enhance user interpretation of mining 
tasks [6]. The results of our case study lend support to their 
views  since  the  VTM  techniques  (i.e.,  the  application  of 
VDM  to  a  collection  of  texts)  facilitates  exploration, 
interpretation,  and  decision-making  in  regard  to  the 
inclusion or exclusion of primary studies. 

The  results  obtained  from  our  case  study  support 
previous  findings  reported  by  Malheiros  et  al.  [10],  and 
suggest that the VTM approach can speed up the selection 
process of primary studies, and that the precision/accuracy 
of  the  selection  of relevant  studies  is at  least as good  as 
using the manual method. Although not part of the formal 
study, qualitative feedback from the case study participants 
indicated that  the tool helped  in minimizing  the  effort to 
select  the  primary  studies.  One  of  the  participants  from
group 2 mentioned that the tool was very useful; it reduced 
the 
to 
include/exclude  studies.  Each  of  the  three  visualization 
techniques required similar mental effort to be understood 
and used. All group 2 participants also mentioned that by 
allowing  users  to  explore  different  visual  representations 
of  the primary  studies,  the  SLR-VTM approach  provides 
additional and complementary information/details that are 
not  readily  available  directly  from  reading  the  studies´ 
abstracts  (e.g.  similarity  relationships,  citation  between 
primary studies).

to  make  a  decision  whether 

time  spent 

The  use  of  Revis  to  support  the  selection  activity 
generally requires an extra time to prepare and provide the 
information about the papers for the tool. The time taken 
depends of different variables, such as: (i) the number of 
primary  studies  to  be  analysed;  (ii)  the  literature  search 
used, for example, if the Web search engines provided by 
digital  libraries  are  or  not  automated  search.  Usually, 
automated search retrieves results from search engines in a 
bibtex format, used by Revis; in other cases, if the studies 
are  in  any  other  format  (e.g.  PDF),  it  is  necessary  to 
convert  them  prior  to  the  analysis;  (iii)  the  number  of 
manual search conducted, among others.  
A. Threats to Validity

One of the potential threats to the internal  validity  of 
our study relates to the sample used in our pilot case study 
(4  PhD  student  participants,  who  are,  to  some  degree, 
influenced  by  their  supervisors). In  our  view,  a  larger 
sample  size  of  diverse  SLR  practitioners  would  help 
increase  the  reliability  of  the  findings.  As  a  first-cut 
assessment  of  the  techniques,  however,  we  believe  our 
study  is  still  useful.  Typically,  many  SLRs  involve  a 
greater  number  of  studies  to  be  considered  during  the 
selection stage (more than 100). However, we chose to use 
in  our  case  study  an  SLR  published  in  the  literature 
containing 37 primary studies. We made this choice on the 
assumption that adding too many studies in our case study 

could similarly influence the results because it might affect 
the  motivation  and  performance  of  the  participants  in 
carrying  out  the  assigned  tasks.  Despite  our  example  
contains  a rather  small number  of  studies, the  Revis  and 
VTM approach suggested by us can be used in real SRLs, 
where a large number of candidate studies are considered –
hundreds and even thousands.  Additionally,  according to 
the  VTM  specialists,  VTM  tools  work  better  with  more 
articles [10].

One  alternative  explanation  for  the  outcomes  is  that 
group 2 received training,  which might have  given  them 
more confidence and understanding about the tasks being 
undertaken.
VI.

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

A  systematic  literature  review  commonly  involves  a 
large set of data to be analysed and interpreted. In the SLR 
phases, the selection of primary studies is one of the most 
important  activities  that  could  impact  the  quality  of  the 
SLR’s  results.  In  light  of  this,  the  main  contributions  of 
this  paper  are  as  follows:  (i)  we  developed  a  VTM 
approach  and  a  tool  (Revis)  to  support  and  partially 
automate the study selection activity of the SLR process; 
(ii) our evidence shows that the use of VTM to support the 
SLR process is promising (in terms of effort reduction and 
selection  correctness).  In  conclusion,  the  work  presented 
here extends Malheiros et al.'s work [10] in supporting the 
SLR-VTM  approach.  Both  studies  make  use  of  VTM 
techniques to support study selection in the SLR process. 
We have proposed the use of new visualization techniques, 
in  particular,  edge  bundles  and  a  citation  network  that 
facilitate  the  exploration  task.  Additionally,  the  new 
visualizations can be used together with the document map 
through the coordination technique, also proposed here. 

The  results  of  our  pilot  case  study  indicate  that  the 
SLR-VTM  approach  was  useful  in  accelerating  the 
selection  task.  Furthermore  it  helped  to  increase  the 
inclusion of relevant papers and the exclusion of irrelevant 
papers. In addition to larger replications of this work, we 
believe  that  interesting  directions  for  future research  are: 
(i) replicate the case study presented here involving more 
students,  as  well  as  with  SLR  experts;  (ii)  explore  other 
types  of  VTM  techniques  and  visualizations  to  further 
support  the  selection  activity;  (iii)  test  the  individual 
effectiveness of the various representations, analyzing the 
trade-off  between  the  number  of  visualizations  and  the 
incremental benefit to be gained from each one; and (iv) 
analyse  if  Revis  could  provide  valuable  support  for 
validating inclusion/exclusion.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This  research  is  supported  by  Brazilian  funding 
141972/2008-4; 
(Process  n. 

agencies:  CNPq 
201622/2009-2),  CAPES  and  FAPESP 
2008/02024-6.

(Processes 

n. 

REFERENCES

[1] B.  A.  Kitchenham  and  S.  Charters.  “Guidelines  for  performing 
systematic  literature  reviews  in  software  engineering”.  Technical 

86

Report EBSE 2007–001, Keele University and Durham University 
Joint Report, 2007.

[2] B.  A.  Kitchenham  and  O.  P.  Brereton  and  D.  Budgen  and  M. 
Turner  and  J.  Bailey  and  S.  Linkman.  “Systematic  literature 
reviews in software engineering – A systematic literature review”. 
Information and Software Technology, vol. 51, n. 1, 2009, pp. 7–
15.

[3] T.  Dybå,  B.  A.  Kitchenham  and  M.  Jorgensen.  “Evidence-based 
software engineering for practitioners”. IEEE Software, vol. 22, n. 
1, 2005, pp. 58–65.

[4] D.  A.  Keim.  “Information  visualization  and  visual  data  mining”. 
IEEE Transactions  on  Visualization and  Computer Graphics,  vol. 
8, n. 1, 2002, pp. 1–8.

[5] A. Tan. “Text mining: The state of the art and the challenges”. In 

Proc. of PAKDD'08, Beijing, 1999, pp. 65–70.

[6] M.  C.  F.  de  Oliveira  and  H.  Levkowitz.  “From  visual  data 
exploration  to  visual  data  mining:  A  survey”.  IEEE  Transactions 
on  Visualization  and  Computer  Graphics,  vol.  9,  n.  1,  2003,  pp. 
378–394.

[7] K.  El  Emam  and  E.Jonker  and  M.  Sampson  and  K.  Krleža-Jerić
and  A.Neisa.  “The  Use  of  Electronic  Data  Capture  Tools  in 
Clinical  Trials:  Web-Survey  of  259  Canadian  Trials”.  Journal  of 
Medical Internet Research, vol. 11, n. 1, 2009, pp. 1–8.

[8] K. R. Felizardo, E. Y. Nakagawa, D. Feitosa and J. C. Maldonado. 
“An approach based on visual text mining to support categorization 
and  classification  in  the  systematic  mapping”.  In  Proc.  of 
EASE'10, 2010, pp. 1–10. 

[9] S.  Ananiadou,  B.  Rea,  N.  Okazaki,  R.  Procter  and  J.  Thomas. 
“Supporting  Systematic  Reviews  Using  Text  Mining”.  Social 
Science Computer Review, vol. 27, n. 4, 2009, pp. 509–523.

[10] V.  Malheiros,  E.  Hohn,  R.  Pinho,  M.  Mendonça  and  J.  C. 
Maldonado.  “A  visual  text  mining  approach  for  systematic 
reviews”. In Proc. of ESEM'07, 2007, pp. 245–254.

[11] B.  A.  Kitchenham.  “Procedures  for  performing  systematic 
reviews”. Tech. Report TR/SE-0401, Software Engineering Group, 
Department  of  Computer  Science  Keele  University,  United  King 
and  Empirical Software Engineering, National ICT Australia  Ltd, 
Austrália, 2004.

[12] B.  A.  Kitchenham  and  R.  Pretorius  and  D.  Budgen  and  O.  P. 
Brereton and M. Turner and M. Niazi and S. Linkman. “Systematic 
literature  reviews  in  software  engineering  –  A  tertiary  study”. 
Information  and  Software  Technology,  vol.  52,  n.  8,  2010,  pp. 
792–805.

[13] K.  Petersen,  R.  Feldt,  M.  Shahid,  and  M.  Mattsson.  “Systematic 
mapping  studies  in  software  engineering”.  In  Proc.  ESEM'08, 
2008, pp. 378–394.

[14] F.  V.  Paulovich,  L.  G.  Nonato,  R.  Minghim  and  H.  Levkowitz. 
“Least  square  projection:  A  fast  high-precision  multidimensional 
projection  technique  and  its  application  to  document  mapping”. 
IEEE Transactions  on  Visualization and  Computer Graphics,  vol. 
14, n. 3, 2008, pp. 564–575. 

[15] P.-N. Tan, M. State, M. Steinbach. “Introduction to Data Mining”. 

Addison-Wesley, 2005.       

[16] D. Holten. “Hierarchical edge bundles: Visualization of adjacency 
relations in hierarchical data”. IEEE Transactions on Visualization 
and Computer Graphics), vol. 12, n. 5, 2006, pp. 741–748.

[17] F. V. Paulovich and R. Minghim. “Hipp: a novel hierarchical point 
placement  strategy  and  its  application  to  the  exploration  of 
document  collections”.  IEEE  Transactions  on  Visualization  and 
Computer Graphics, vol. 14, n. 6, 2008, pp. 1229–1236.

[18] P.  A.  Eades.  “A  heuristic  for  graph  drawing”.  In  Congressus 

Numerantium, vol. 42, n. 1, 1984, pp. 149–160.

[19] V.  R.  Basili,  F.  Shull  and  F.  Lanubile.  “Building  knowledge 
through  families  of  experiments”.  IEEE  Transaction  on  Software 
Engineering, vol. 25, n. 4, 1999, pp. 456–473.

