Entropy based software processes improvement

Abstract: Actual results of software process improvement projects show different levels of success. Although many software development organisations have adopted improvement models such as CMMI, it appears to be difficult to improve software development processes in the right way, e.g. tuned to the actual needs of the organisation. This paper presents a new approach to determine the direction of improvement for an organisation. This approach is based on an elaboration of the concept of entropy. The approach is empirically validated by carrying out interviews in 11 software development organisations in The Netherlands. The results of the research show that software development organisations can be classified and can be positioned on the basis of their internal and external entropy, c.q. the level of (dis)order in the business system and its environment. Based on a possible out-of-balance situation between the internal and external entropy, directions for software process improvement can be discussed. As such the proposed approach can support the application of current software process improvement methodologies such as the CMMI.

Keywords: Software process improvement, Entropy, Empirical research results

1 Introduction
To be competitive in the current economy, more and more software development organisations strive to improve their processes. This is based on convictions that an improvement of processes ultimately leads to an increased quality of software products. Over the last 10 years several improvement models have been developed that act as frameworks and tools to improve software development processes, see Balla et al. (2001). Capability Maturity Models (CMM, CMMI), see SEI (2001, 2006), Paulk et al. (1993, 1995), are being applied increasingly in the software engineering domain. The starting point for process improvements is a so-called process assessment, i.e. an analysis and subsequent determination of the current performance level of the software development process. On the basis of the outcome of an assessment, an improvement project can be initiated. However, the actual results of improvement projects are based on limited sets of data and are difficult to quantify (Ruiz et al. 2001). Case study reports and success factor investigations offer until now only a limited insight in the way software development organisations can and/or should try to improve their software development processes.
A closer look at assessment and improvement methodologies shows that they are strongly oriented to the internal processes of an organisation. They focus for example on internal organisational factors such as management commitment, on internal human factors such as training, on internal process factors such as project planning, on internal technical factors such as tool support, and on financial factors such as project budgets (Habra et al. 2007; Von Wangenheim et al. 2006). In Ngwenyama and Neilsen (2003) contradictory sets of assumptions about organisational culture in the CMM approach are revealed, however only organisation-internal change aspects are addressed. As a consequence of this internal orientation it can be concluded that current software process improvement projects pay little attention to the influence of the environment of a software development organisation when deciding on the way the software development processes could be improved (Boldyreff et al. 1997). External factors such as customer satisfaction are only very rarely taken into account in software process improvement projects, see e.g. Kuilboer and Ashrafi (2000).
This paper introduces and validates a new concept for software process improvement, i.e. the entropy balance of an organisation. The kernel of this concept is the distinction between the internal and external entropy of a software development organisation. Entropy is a cybernetic concept that stands for the level of disorder of a system (Boltzmann 2000). The main assumption in this paper is that an organisation should be aware of not only its own internal disorder but also its external disorder. Differences between the internal and external disorder, i.e. the entropy balance, should play a role in the process of choosing a direction for process improvement.
In this paper the first steps have been made to define and operationalise these theoretical concepts of internal and external entropy. This has been done in a structured process of identification and assessment of relevant internal and external factors of software development organisations. Based on a selection of these internal and external factors, the degree of internal and external entropy, and the difference between them, the so-called ‘
improvement space’, has been determined in 11 software development organisations. Within its own ‘improvement space’ an organisation can strive at a ‘better’ balance between its internal and external entropy. The information about the improvement space is considered to be of importance for an efficient and an effective software process improvement program, e.g. a CMMI project.
Due to the exploratory nature of the work, the decision was taken to base the project on collaboration with experts from the field. The participation was obtained of six senior IT consultants with a long-year experience in software process improvement, in varying industrial domains, such as the high-tech software-intensive domain, the banking and insurance domain, and the discrete manufacturing domain. During a period of 6 months the group discussed the concept of entropy, and its elaboration towards software engineering practice, in close collaboration with two senior researchers. In regular meetings, every two weeks, the concepts of internal and external entropy have been elaborated and the characteristics of organisations, which influence their entropies, have been investigated. Consequently steps have been made by the research group regarding the quantification of the factors that influence the entropies in terms of measurement mechanisms, and the development of a questionnaire in order to collect data from practice to validate the application of the elaborated entropy concept. The questionnaire has been used in 11 organisations to collect entropy data following the format of a structured interview. The ultimate goal is, on the basis of the empirical results, to further elaborate and enrich the concept of entropy in the software engineering domain, and to develop a well-founded questionnaire-based entropy instrument to support organisations in their software process improvement programs.
This paper deals in Sect. 2 with software process improvement and its limitations, and introduces the concept of entropy. Section 3 focuses on the first steps towards identification and metrification of the concepts of the internal and external entropy. In Sect. 4 the results are presented of an empirical research project in that the entropy of 11 software development organisations has been investigated. Finally, in Sect. 5 conclusions and recommendations for future research are given.

2 SPI and internal and external factors
In the software engineering domain, improvement activities are known as Software Process Improvement (SPI). SPI is being defined as:
The measurement-based improvement of the performance of the software development process aimed at delivery in due time, against agreed budgets, and with the required quality. Humphrey (2001)
A well-known and broadly accepted model for the improvement of software development processes is CMM (Capability Maturity Model). CMM prescribes a specific sequence of improvement activities that have to be followed to reach higher levels of software process maturity. CMM and comparable maturity models are used on the one hand to strive at a standardisation of processes and on the other hand to realise a decrease of product failures by eliminating their causes. However, it is questionable whether these improvement models can be applied in the same way for each and every organisation. For instance, an organisation that has to deal with an increasingly turbulent market, with changing needs, and that has improved its development processes by defining, standardising, and in some cases bureaucratising them in detail, can face difficulties in responding to the dynamic requirements of that market. As a result there could be a ‘mismatch’ between the (internal) goal of the software process improvement program of the organisation and the needs of the market. Examples of other factors in the environment of an organisation that can influence its behaviour are changing governmental and legal factors. However, these types of external factors have not until now been addressed by software process improvement methodologies, e.g. Ngwenyama and Neilsen (2003). This paper proposes that both internal and external factors should be taken into account during process assessment the subsequent determination of process improvement activities.
In order to make it possible to address external and internal factors in process assessment, the concept of external and internal entropy is introduced. Entropy is a concept by which the internal and external situation of a system can be characterised (Boltzmann 2000). A low entropy means a high level of order, or structure and stability, in a system. A high entropy means a low, or even chaotic, level. Based on these characteristics, organisations can be considered as dynamic systems that are continuously moving and changing, and that have to strive at a balance between their internal and external entropy. For example, in the case ofa market that is very dynamic, then a company in that market is, as a consequence, faced with a high external entropy and has to be able to respond quickly and adequately to that market, in other words, the company must be flexible. The research group of senior consultants and researchers have investigated in close collaboration the characteristics of organisations and the external and internal factors that influence the internal and external entropy. Table 1 gives some examples ofcharacteristics of organisations with high and low internal and external entropies. These rather abstract characteristics are used as a basis for making the concept of entropy more operational.
Based on information about the internal and external entropy, an organisation can decide to follow a particular direction regarding software process improvement. For example, to increase its own flexibility, an organisation could be forced in principle to increase its internal flexibility so that it becomes able to respond to the (dynamic) market. Such an organisation might have to lower or drop certain formal standardisation rules and to increase the level of decisional freedom of employees in the development processes. This dropping of standardisation rules and an increase of decisional freedom of employees, could then become the main theme for software process improvement in this type of organisation.

3 Measuring entropy
To be able to use the concept of internal and external entropy in a practical way it is necessary to make entropy measurable. In accordance with Boltzmann (2000) entropy is based on the number of states that a system can have. In order to make entropy operational the state of a system has been linked to basic size variables. We considered organisations as business systems, consisting of interrelated components. The entropy of such a business system increases with:
• an increasing number of components; 
• an increasing number of interactions between the components; 
• an increasing number of changes in the environment.
From discussions on increasing and decreasing entropies, the research group derived two concepts that play a central role in the determination of entropy: complexity and dynamics. These two concepts are described as follows: 
• complexity is a measure of the number of interacting components; 
• dynamics is a measure of the amount of changes over time.

3.1 Entropy and its relations to complexity and dynamics
The research group then tried to make entropy measurable on the basis of these concepts of complexity and dynamics. In principle, measurement is the linking of a value to a parameter, by positioning the parameter on a measurement scale. The research group has discussed intensively the applicability of the four types of measurement scales: ratio, interval, ordinal and nominal. In this study it was finally decided to measure complexity and dynamics by using a four value measurement scale with the levels: low, average-low, average-high and high, see Table 2. Of course it was recognised that this measuring mechanism is only a first step towards the quantification of entropy. Based on further empirical investigations the applicability of the mechanism should be validated and improved.
Regarding the measurement of complexity a number of business system characteristics have been investigated such as the number of employees per business function, the number of functions per department, the number of departments in the organisation, etc. Based on numbers for these parameters, organisations can be classified. For example the number of employees can be used to classify an organisation as small (1–9), average-small (10–99), average large (100–999) or large (1000?). This particular classification is also a result of the study and based on several intensive workshop sessions of the research group.
Similarly, it was decided how the dynamics of a business system can be measured. For example a classification of an organisation regarding its dynamics, has to be determined on the basis of the number of process changes per time-frame. To determine the number of changes of a specific parameter, such as employees, information is needed on the input, the output, and the current number of the employees. Other parameters that resulted from the research process are departments, products, customers, suppliers, competitors etc. Consequently a total score for entropy has to be calculated by combining the scores for dynamics and complexity, see Table 3.

3.2 Entropy and its relations with business system aspects
The next step in the study was the development of a questionnaire to determine the internal and external entropy of a software development organisation on the basis of empirical data. For this, a questionnaire was developed as a suitable means for the collection of specific data from practitioners about their business systems. As a result of the process in this study the structure of the questionnaire has been based on a subdivision of the concept of business system into Market (external entropy), Organisation and Factory (internal entropy). Subsequently these aspects are further subdivided as follows: Market into Product, Design, and Architecture; Organisation into Process and Structure, and Factory into People, Resources and Technology. Table 4 summarises the basic structure of the questionnaire. The objective of the questionnaire is that for each of the three aspects and sub-aspects the complexity and dynamics can be determined. The questionnaire enables the collection of data on the sub-aspects of a business system. Based on this complexity and the dynamics, and finally the internal and external entropy of a business system can be determined.
Table 5 provides an example, addressing the complexity of the Market (external entropy), and its sub-aspect Product, to illustrate the level of detail of the questions of the questionnaire.
The initial questionnaire for carrying out the structured interviews in practice consisted of 65 questions. These questions have been elaborated, by the senior consultants in collaboration with the researchers, during several workshops. Two pilot interviews have been carried out by a researcher and a consultant to test the applicability of the questions. Subsequently some questions have been removed and some others have been reformulated.
In the questionnaire the (sub-)questions about the business system aspect Market and its sub-aspect Product, lead to scores from which the external entropy can be determined. The questions about the business system aspects Organisation and Factory lead to scores from which the internal entropy can be determined. By comparing the scores of the external entropy and the internal entropy it becomes possible to position organisations in a two- dimensional matrix, see Fig. 1.
A difference between the internal and external entropy shows, what has been called initially, the ‘improvement space’. The concept of ‘improvement space’ indicates that an organisation should strive at a balance between internal and external entropy. The larger the distance an organisation has to the balance-line, the larger the space for improvement is, see Fig. 1. In Fig. 1 the balance-line is represented by the dotted black line. The position of this balance-line is currently based on the usage of the data collected (i.e. the 11 companies). This means that we assume that on the average these companies have a ‘certain’ balance between internal and external entropy. It has to be emphasised that this is just a first step to determine this balance-line. Further research, e.g. to improve the conceptual basis of entropy, the measurement mechanisms and the questionnaire, and the collection of more data from organisations, is needed to determine the balance-line more precisely.
In Fig. 1 the bullet represents an organisation with a particular distance to the balance-line. This organisation has a relatively high level of internal entropy and a relatively low level of external entropy. Such an organisation should discuss this out-of-balance situation internally. As a result the organisation could decide to emphasise in its software process improvement activities a decrease of its internal entropy, for example by striving at a certain level of standardisation of its processes. By doing so, the internal entropy will decrease until a balance is reached. CMM levels are shown on Fig. 1 but have been deduced somewhat intuitively. Notice that on CMM5, which is the highest maturity level, it is assumed that the internal entropy is extremely low. This means that a software development organisation has an extremely high level of internal organisational order. On the contrary, on the lowest level of CMM, an organisation has, as also has been stated in literature, e.g. SEI (2006), quite often an ad-hoc and chaotic software development process. In that case the internal entropy, i.e. the internal level of disorder, can be assumed to be very high.

4 Results of the research: space for improvement for software development organisations
The questionnaire has been applied in an empirical research project in which 11 software development organisations in The Netherlands were involved. The questionnaire was answered during an interview so as to improve the quality of the answers. In each organisation both a person responsible for software process improvement and a representative product manager have been interviewed. The software process improvement experts, with a strong internal orientation, all had more than 5 years experience in the field. The product managers, with a strong orientation on the environment (or: Market factors) of the organisation had about 10–15 years of relevant experience. Each interview has been carried out by two persons: one senior consultant and one researcher. The interviews took about 1.5 h per interview. The ‘entropy results’, on the basis of answers to the questions and quite some clarifications, have subsequently been reviewed and validated by the interviewees.. In the introduction of the interview sessions the interviewees have been asked to answer some more general questions. One of these questions was to describe the level of experience with software process improvement of the organisation. In Sect. 4.1 we present first these experience levels. In Sect. 4.2 we will present and discuss the obtained entropy scores.

4.1 Experience with process improvement
The 11 organisations that participated in this research project are all based in The Netherlands and active in various industrial domains. In the following an overview is given of the organisations and the domain in that they perform, respectively:
• one organisation from the semi-conductor domain (A) 
• one organisation from the business software applications domain (B) 
• one organisation from the defence system domain (C) 
• one organisation from the domain of on-line photo imaging service (D) 
• two organisations from the medical system domain (E and F) 
• one organisation from the domain of consumer electronics (G) 
• one organisation from the climate and process control domain (H) 
• one organisation from a technical research application domain (I) 
• one organisation from the banking and insurance domain (J) 
• one organisation from the domain of copying and printing technology (K)

The identification code of each organisation will be used in Fig. 3 to clarify the entropy balance of the different organisations.
In this paper no explicit information is given on the CMM levels of the organisations mentioned above. Only some of the organisations were striving at a higher level of maturity in a formal way, i.e. based on an independent assessment of an external organisation. Other organisations tried to follow an own direction and approach to improve their level of maturity, and some organisations refused to make use of CMM or CMMI. As a consequence the different situations were hardly comparable from the viewpoint of the ‘reached’ CMM level.
Figure 2 shows the experience with software process improvement in the respondent organisations. In total 17 interviewees, out of 22 (two per organisation), could answer this question and the result suggests that 80% of the respondent organisations are experienced in SPI.

4.2 Positioning organisations on the basis of their entropy scores
Based on answers from the questions regarding the complexity and the dynamics of the three aspects Market, Organisation and Factory, the internal and external entropy of the 11 organisations has been determined. Figure 3 shows the results. Each code letter refers to an individual organisation as presented in the beginning of this section. Our analysis shows that organisations can have a totally different internal/external entropy balance. As a consequence different organisations could follow rather different directions regarding the improvement of their software development processes In Tables 6–9, the characteristics of four organisations, one from each of the four quadrants of Fig. 3, denoted as organisation A, B, C and D, have been specified and their ‘space for improvement’ has been clarified.
Organisation A operates in a complex and dynamic market. But also the internal organisational characteristics show a relatively high (internal) entropy. As a consequence Figure 3 shows for this organisation a deviation regarding the balance-line of internal/ external entropy. Based on this information organisation A could decide to strive at a decrease of its internal entropy, e.g. by means of a further standardisation of its development processes. Of course it could also be decided that the organisation withdraws from too dynamic market-segments, in order to decrease its external entropy.
Organisation B has a relatively low level of internal entropy, which means that there exists quite some order in their development processes, but it operates in a market which is highly complex and dynamic. Based on this information organisation B could choose for more flexibility in their software development processes. This could be reached by a decrease in process standardisation, e.g. allowing the organisation to move to a lower level of maturity (of course the question is justified whether a further improvement of the level of maturity to CMM level 5, i.e. the optimized level, also could lead to more flexibility.
Table 8 shows an organisation in a quite stable market situation. Although the software development process of organisation C is quite complex, this process is stable and doesn’t show many changes over time. However, to improve the identified out-of-balance entropy, organisation C could consider to allow the organisation not to strive at a higher level of maturity, or even to decrease its current level, because of the absence of pressure for further process improvement from the (stable) market situation.
Organisation D shows a rather high level of internal entropy, i.e. internal disorder, which can cause problems regarding the quality of the service they provide to the market. Although the market situation seems to be stable it could be wise to strive at a better entropy balance, e.g. by increasing the level of maturity of the software development processes.
Different software development organisations show different types of out-of-balance situations regarding their internal and external entropy. Each of these organisations should be aware of the characteristics of these out-of-balance situations during, or preferably before carrying out, software process improvement programs. The characteristics of the entropy out-of-balance situations can be of utmost importance to decide for a particular direction for improvement. The results from the study show that it is not always necessary for a software development organisation to strive at the highest level of maturity ofCMM. Even a decrease in the level of maturity can be justified on the basis of the entropy data of an organisation.

5 Conclusions
This paper presents the hypothesis that software development organisations can be classified and can be positioned on the basis of their internal and external entropy. The so-called internal/external entropy balance can be used to determine directions for software process improvement. This hypothesis is elaborated in collaboration between researchers and IT-practitioners, i.e. senior consultants. The abstract concept of entropy has been made operational by means of discussions between researchers and practitioners in a series of regular workshops over a period of 6 months. Different steps in the study have been recognised, i.e. the distinction between internal and external entropy, the identification of the (sub-)aspects of business systems that can be used to determine the internal and external entropy, the measurement mechanisms, the questionnaire to collect the actual data from practice to determine finally the (eventually out-of-balance) entropy situation. Although the research group is confident about this ‘first’ conceptual elaboration, the group is also convinced that on the basis of the results of the application of the questionnaire, the conceptual basis should be improved further. In particular the scientific foundation of the (sub-)aspects of the internal and external entropy, i.e. Market, Organisation and Factory, needs further improvement. Also the measurability of the mentioned aspects, and in particular their complexity and dynamics, needs a further elaboration. However, the results from the application of the questionnaire in 11 organisations have also provided these organisations with valuable information regarding their software process improvement situation.
The research results show that software development organisations can have quite different internal/external entropy balances, and this can lead to quite different decisions for the direction to be followed in software process improvement.

